?*  FAUSTINA      B.IX   Chronicle  of Melrose   Abbey; 
      Rishanger, chronicle; etc. 
    Catalogue: 36682. 
    Previous ownership: John Leland (Poole & Bateson, JBS, 
      p. 471 and  p. 471 n. 2). The annotations by Leland 
      would  seem to suggest that the manuscript may have 
      been all of a piece when he owned it, but it is notable 
      that in JBS, p. 471, John Bale listed the Melrose and the 
      Rishanger  materials as apparently separate, though 
      contiguous, items in Leland’s library. Moreover, there is 
      also evidence that the  manuscript  may  have been 
      divided, at least temporarily, or remained divided, after 
      Leland’s time: fol. 76 appears at some stage to have been 
      an outside leaf, as - compared with its successors — it 
      has a rather worn  appearance; two page-numbering 
      sequences, one  no  earlier than the  late sixteenth 
      century, begin on that folio and run for a few leaves (the 
      disrupted order being reflected in sixteenth-century 
      annotations on fol. 77 (top), fol. 77v (foot), ete); and the 
      volume  carries binding instructions by Cotton (on an 
      unnumbered  leaf which was once the front pastedown), 
      while pages have  been cropped  since Leland  made 
      his annotations. The probability therefore is that the 
      two parts travelled together but remained physically 
      separate until Cotton united them, and this appears to 
      be confirmed by the quire signatures, where there are 
      two more or less contemporary sequences. One sequence 
      runs throughout and is complete; the other appears less 
      regularly but alongside the complete sequence and on 
      the same leaves. The latter is probably in Cotton's hand, 
      and the complete  sequence was  no doubt  entered a 
      little later (by someone else), once the two parts were 
      finally bound together. 
    Loans: Patrick Young, 1621, Henry Montagu, 1621 (2.30); 
      John Selden, ¢.1638 (163.10). 
   James Ussher asked Selden to make for him extracts from 
      the Melrose chronicle in the Cotton library: Elrington, 
      Works of Ussher, XN, p. 176: letter of 16 April, 1622.