his will of 1624 and he observes that an annotation on 
     fol. 3 appears to be in Lsle’s hand. He also establishes 
      that this is the only manuscript in the Cotton collection 
      to contain a reference published by Lisle in 1623 in A 
     Saxon   Treatise from Book   I of the Liber Eliensis. 
      Finally, he suggests that the erased inscription on fol. 
      95 (see above) can be read as including the letters ‘Au’ 
      and ‘t, probably of ‘Augustine, Lindsell’s first name. 
      However, the difficulty with his identification is that 
      there is compelling evidence that Dom.   XV  was  in 
      Cotton’s hands well before 1622. Loan 71.37, above, to 
      Arthur Agarde, d. 1615, reads: ‘Item a Book of Ely in 4*° 
      old bound having the lyf of St Ethelred in it it was Mr 
     Austen  steward’: Dom. XV  is the only Ely manuscript 
      in the Cotton collection to contain a life of St Etheldreda, 
      Moreover, the fact that Augustine Steward is recorded 
      as previous owner in this loan must open up the possi- 
     bility that the inscription on fol. 95 contained that 
      family’s name, rather than Lindsell’s and this alterna- 
      tive gains strength when the  remains of the erased 
      signature on fol. 95 are  compared  with  the three 
      examples of a signature in Royal  15 C.VI (qv). The 
      latter are those  of Augustine   Styward,  probably 
      Steward’s grandfather. One (on fol. 4) has been heavily 
      erased and replaced by Cotton's signature in precisely 
     the same manner  as the change on fol. 95. Furthermore, 
     both the erased and the other two surviving signatures 
      in the Royal manuscript carry a decoration to the tail of 
      the letter ‘y’ in Styward’s surname, and a small part of a 
      similar decoration can be seen below the letter ‘c’ of 
     ‘Bruceus’ on fol. 95 of Dom. (where it is certainly not a 
      part of Cotton’s own signature). If, therefore, Dom. XV 
      is to be ruled out as the manuscript passed to Cotton in 
      1622, either Vesp. A.XIX or the manuscript listed as no. 
      271 of 6018 (and  now  missing, but discussed in the 
      entry for A.XIX) may  be alternatives. Despite this, it 
      is of course perfectly possible that L’Isle may have 
      consulted Dom.  XV  and used  it as the source of his 
      reference in A Saxon Treatise, although the manuscript 
      at no. 271  could seemingly  have  provided  similar 
      information. 
   This or Nero A.XV, XVI, or Tit. A.I may be the chronicle 
      of Ely which Francis Tate suggested in a letter of 1613, 
      probably to Cotton,  might  be available: Jul. C.IU, 
      fol. 368, 
   Annexes  3a, 5a, 6b.