VOL.                    [ust  ]

MS.1e  BENTLEY,  Ricuarp (1662-1742) to John Evelyn. 
                   ALS. 
                   12 JANUARY 1696/7 
                   ST. JAMES’s! 

                               Descriptio:    Paper, folio, two leaves, with  seal, text p.3, signed p.2, address  p.1, draft of 
                               Evelyn’s reply? pp.2 and 4. 

                           Provenance:   William Upcott (1846, Lot 432)—John Young (1869, Lot 66)— Alfred Morrison 
                           (IV, 1919, Lot 2697). 

                          TRANSCRIPT:                                             St Iames’es Jan: 12h 96/7 
                          Honoured fir, I understand by your kind letter, yt came this day to my hands yt mine, 
                          wh  I wrote to you about three weeks ago mifcarried*. I have been much concerned 
                          ever fince; knowing yt you do not ufe to be flow in returning an Anfwer; & was afraid 
                          yt you did not enjoy fo good health, as all y* know you (& who does not yt knows any 
                          thing of Learning or Nature?) wish you and pray for you. But to day you have eafed 
                          me of y* follicitude: 
                            The  Business of Mine, was to acquaint you, yt now about a month ago  I camz to 
                          Town, &  yt next day being Saturday waited on his Grace; where I had fome common 
                          difcourfe, but nothing at all about y® Lecture*. But I had heard from other hands; 
                          yt it was difpofed of. The perfon yt has it, is very well qualified for y* performance, 
                          and has defired it a long time®. Pray be not concerned therfore for me; as if this was a 
                          difappoirtment: for I fpeak fincerely, I am glad to be excufed. This year I fhall find 
                          my felf other work fufficient. I told you likewife in y* loft letter, yt I fhould be glad 
                          to give my felf yt pleafant & ufefull employment of revifing your printed fheets®; if 
                          they were not already finifhed. Be pleafed therfore to give M‘ Took’ notice, to fend 
                          them to me. I left y° Bp. pretty well at worcefter®; but fince my departure, he has had 
                          a fevere fit of y¢ Gout; ws anguifh was doubled by y¢ fickness of his Lady y® beft of 
                          women;  who I fear at this very moment is dying or dead of a dropfy®. Our Univerfity 
                          press goes on; we expect Letter from abroad by y® next Convoy: Preffes and all tackling 
                          are allready provided at home!®. I have not been at our friends! in York buildings 
                          fince my return. I do not know it is; but methinks, fince I fee not M‘ Evelyn there, 
                          I infenfibly become a ftranger. I am not yet fo happy either to have a wife, or y° 
                          promife of one: but I endeavour to make my folitude as eafy as I can by finding alway 
                          fomthing to do. I am now upon a Iobb for our friend M" Wotton'?: then I proceed to 
                          pay my  debts to you by printing my fermons!*. fhe  Dutch men  have  had from me 
                          wt I promifed them; & I expect the Book out every week!4. I am, Hon!  fir, 
                                                          Your  ever obliged 
                                                             Humble  fert 
                                                               R Bentley. 

                         Apprsss, p.1: For John Evelyn Efquire at Wotton near Dorking in Surry. 

                                      [ 1152 ]

Notes:  1 Bentley was  appointed  Keeper of the Royal Libraries 6 April 1694, and took up his 
                   residence in St. James’s Palace early in 1696. 
                 2 This draft, which is so badly written as to be partly not decipherable, is dated 19 January 
                   1696/7 but  is the same letter of which about a third is printed in the various editions of 
                   Evelyn’s  correspondence under  the date 20 January 1696/7. The portions omitted are for 
                   the most part of no great consequence or are repeated in other letters of that period which 
                   have  been printed. 
                 3 Evelyn,  according to his draft reply, received Bentley's first letter the day after he wrote 
                   the letter to which the present refers. 
                 4 Evelyn  was  co-trustee with Archbishop  Tenison of the Boyle Lectures to which Bentley 
                   here refers. 
                 5 Francis  Gastrell, later Bishop of Chester, was the successful candidate, Bentley preached 
                   the first Lecture Sermons after the foundation of this famous lectureship in 1691. 
                 6 The  work  here referred to is presumably Evelyn’s Numismata published this same year. 
                 7 Benjamin   Tooke, bookseller at Middle Temple  Gate, Fleet Street. 
                 8 Bishop  Edward   Stillingfleet. 
                 g Stillingfleet’s second wife, Elizabeth daughter of Sir Nicholas Pedley, died early this same 
                   year. 
                 10 Bentley was the initiator of the renovation of the Cambridge University Press at this time. 
                   He  was,  however, somewhat   over optimistic about the type which he had  ordered from 
                   Holland  for it did not arrive until 28 January 1698 (cf. S.C.Roberts 4 History of the Cam- 
                   bridge University Press p-77)- 
                 11 Samuel Pepys. 
                 12 This ‘Iobb’ was  presumably  his ‘Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris, etc.’ which 
                    Bentley appended  to the second edition of Dr. William Wotton’s Reflections upon Ancient 
                   and  Modern  Learning published in the spring of 1697. 
                 13 Presumably  one of the early editions of Bentley's Boyle Lectures which usually appeared 
                   under  the title ‘The Folly and Unreasonableness of Atheism’. 
                 14 Bentley is here referring to his edition of Callimachi fragmenta collecta published in the 
                    Utrecht edition edited by J.G.Graevius, 1697.