252 

DAVENANT, Sir Wittram. 
GONDIBERT: | AN HEROICK | POEM, | WRITTEN BY | $* WIL- 
LIAM D’ AVENANT. | (device, fountain with motto ‘DVM PREMOR 
ATTOLLOR’] | LONDON, | Printed by Tho[mas]. Newcomb for Fohn 
Holden, and are to | be fold at his Shop at the fign of the Anchor in the | 
NEVV-EXCHANGE, 1651. | 

FirsT EDITION. Quarto. 

Cotation: A(the first, a blank and genuine)-Kkk‘(the last, blank and genuine); 224 leaves. 
(Sig Gg3 is signed G3, and Hhh3 is Ggg3. Regarding cancels, see below). 

pp-1-70; The answer of Mt Hobbes, dated 10 

Contents: blank, Sig [A]; title, recto [A2]; ver- 
January 1650, pp.71-88; commendatory verses 

so blank; The author’s preface to... M". Hobs, 

VOL. [ 247 ]

by ‘ED. WALLER.’, and ‘AB. COWLEY.’, D’4VENANT.’, recto Kkk-verso Kkk3; blank, 
both in italic, pp.[89-92]; text, pp-1-3443 Post- Sig [Kkk4]. (P.82 of preface is numbered 84; 
script, dated 22 October 1650, signed ‘WILL. 68 of text is 98). 

Original mottled calf, blind-tooled, (repaired and rebacked). 854 x 634 inches}. The Waldron— 
Philip Lord Hardwicke— Shakespeare Library (II, 1918, Lot 115) copy with Hardwicke book- 
plate. 

AN edition in octavot was published also dated 1651, but it would appear to be later 
than the present because first, it was the usual practice that reprinted editions, if of a 
different size and not elaborated in text or ornamentation, were compressed; second, 
the octavo edition has appended a list of errata all but one of which are to be found in 
the text of the quarto edition; third, it was the quarto edition which was acquired by 
Thomason who did not ordinarily buy second editions; and finally, several presentation 
copies of the quarto edition are known whereas only the Colonel Isham presentation 
copy of the octavo can be traced and concerning it there is some doubtft. 
The prefatory essay of the author and Hobbes’s reply, together with the commenda- 
tory verses, were separately published under the title: ‘A discourse upon Gondibert 
. with an answer to it by Mr. Hobbs, Paris, chez Matthieu Guillemot, 1650’. It has 
sometimes been stated that that edition was actually printed in London but, although 
it was entered in the Stationers’ Register, 15 February 1650, by Richard Mariott, there 
is no good reason for doubting the Paris printing, for the third Matthieu Guillemot was 
in business at Paris in 1650 and Davenant does not appear to have left that city until 
the summer of that year. Furthermore, Thomason failed to include a copy in his collec- 
tions. 
Sig [N4] and [Qq4] are said to be cancels in the Forman-R.B.Adam copy. In the pres- 
ent Sig N2 and apparently [N4] are cancels, while Sig [Qq4] appears to be uncancelled. 
It has not been possible to compare this copy with one having a variant state of these 
leaves although the W.A.White copy reads in the second line of stanza 89, verso [Qqa], 
‘Florift’, in roman, while the present has that word in italic. The octavo 1651 edition 
gives ‘Florift’ in roman. Sig [Qq4] does not appear to be a cancel in the White copy. 

{The Ashley copy is described as being in original or early calf and yet is half an inch shorter and three- 
quarters of an inch narrower than the present; while the Heber-Britwell presentation copy, also in original 
calf, measures a quarter-inch taller than the present. Since the Britwell copy is described as on ‘Large 
Paper’, the present copy may not improperly aspire to that distinction for the difference in the margins 
of the present and the Ashley copy, though not very great, is still a difference not likely to be due to the 
ruthlessness of the binder. However, the C.K.Shorter copy in original morocco is said to be an eighth- 
inch taller even than the Britwell and we have seen half a dozen copies in early or contemporary calf and 
find that all of them are very nearly the same size as the present so that if this is large-paper they are 
not very rare, 
}For what is apparently an unique variant title of the octavo edition see Edward Almack Fine Old Bindings 
p-76. 
H This last argument is not of any considerable weight except that it corroborates what one would naturally 
expect.

[ 248 ]

All the copies which we have examined have several manuscript corrections in the 
text in the same places and, apparently, in the same hand. This hand is remarkably 
like Davenant’s as reproduced in Greg’s Literary Autographs and yet, unless one could 
be sure that all these copies belong to a special large-paper issue, it would seem improb- 
able that Davenant corrected them himself. 

Eyre I, 354, 363. Grorer Cius W-P I, 213. ASHLEY Car. X, 93 (tp. facs.).