617 

LODGE, Tuomas. 
A fig for Momus: | Containing | Pleafant varietie, included in Satyres, | 
Eclogues, and Epistles, by T.L. of Lin- | colnes Inne Gent. | Che pecora fi 
fa, il lupo felo mangia. | [diamond-shaped lace-ornament] | AT LONDON| 
Printed [by Joan Orwin] for Clement Knight, and are to bee | folde at his 
fhop at the little North- | doore of Paules Church. | 1595. | 

First EDITION. Quarto. 
Cotation: A-I4(the last, a blank, lacking); 35 leaves present. (Sig F3 is signed E3). 

Contents: title, recto [A]; verso blank; dedi- Readers whatsoeuer, in italic, dated 6 Maij 
cation to William Earle of Darbie, signed 1595, signed ‘.Z.’, recto Az-recto [Aq]; faultes 
“Thomas Lodge’, Sig A2; To the Gentlemen escapte, verso [Aq]; text, recto B-verso 13. 

Green morocco, extra in geometrical design, with Wakefield Christie-Miller arms, by Pratt. 
734 x 536 inches. The Lamport Hall copy discovered in 1867, and added to the Britwell Library 
in 1893, sold 1922, Lot 440, with labelt. 

Tuts volume of satires in verse, while not perhaps in itself of great literary merit and 
certainly not the first of that genre in English, being preceded by Skelton, Wyatt, 
Gascoigne and Haket, is nevertheless important in the history of English letters for it 
introduced the avowed imitation and occasional paraphrase of classical models. It also 
effectively demonstrated that classical satire is most suitably written in the decasyllabic 
couplet while at the same time it made current the fashion of pseudonymous allusion. 
For these reasons 4 fig for Momus ranks as one of the most important of Lodge’s pro- 
ductions. 
‘The present is likewise one of the rarest of Lodge’s published works, for, besides the 
present, only five copies can be traced, viz. the British Museum (Corser), Bodleian, 
Huntington (Hoe), Harvard (White), and the Folger (Clawson). 

{The books at Lamport which were not relegated to the lumber-room in the eighteenth century had a 
Chippendale armorial bookplate from which this label was designed, cf. the Harmsworth copy of The 
CL Psalmes of David Middleburgh, 1602, and Linschoten Discours 1598, now at L.C.Harper's. 
Perhaps, also, the formal satire was practised by Donne and Bishop Hall before this date, but even if 0, 
the honor of first printing still belongs to Lodge. 

S.T.C. 16658. ARBER IJ. 295. HUNTINGTON C.L., 260. Corser Collectanea IV, 374. Hoe 
Car. V (1905) 323.