180 

CHETTLE, HeEn[ry]. (c. 1560-1607). 
Englandes Mourning | Garment: | Worne here by plaine Shepheardes; | 
in memorie of their facred Miftreffe, | ELIZABETH, Queene of Vertue 
while fhee | liued, and Theame of Sorrow, | being dead. | To which is added 
the true manner of her | Emperiall Funerall. | After which foloweth the 
Shepheards Spring-Song, | for entertainement of King IAMES our | moft 
potent Soueraigne. | Dedicated to all that loued the deceafed Queene, | 
and honor the liuing King. | Non Verbis fed Virtute. | [ornament, mask 
with ringsf] | {[ Printed at London by V{alentine]. S[immes]. for Thomas 
Millington, and are | to be fold at his fhop vnder faint Peters Church in 
Cornhil. [1603] | 

  

FirsT EDITION. Quarto. 
Coutation: A-F*; G?(the last, probably blank, lacking); 25 leaves present. 

Contents: title, recto [A]; verso blank; To all Funeral, recto F2-verso F3; To the Reader, 
true Louers of ... Queene Elizabeth, signed signed ‘Hen: Chetle.’, verso F3; The Shep- 
‘Foelicem fuiffe infaustum.’, Sig A2; text, recto heards Spring Song, recto [F4]-verso G. 
A3-verso F; The order and proceeding at the 

Brown morocco, top edge gilt, otherwise uncut, by Stikeman. 7 x 534 inches. Sold Sotheby’s (18 
May 1903, Lot 190) unbound, acquired by Marsden J. Perry for whom it was bound and whose 
Shakespearean Library label it bears; subsequently in collections of H.V.Jones (1923, Lot 47) 
with label, and J.L.Clawson (1926, I, Lot 137) with bookplate. 

Tuere is another edition which was piratically published by Walter Burre who was 
fined for same 7 June 1603 (Arber 11.836). It is dated 1603, and brazenly asserts on 
the title that it is ‘imprinted for Thomas Millington and to be sold by Walter Burre.’ 
The only copies of the Burre edition which can be traced are the Bridgewater-Hunt- 
ington, and the Folger. According to Collier the principal difference between the two 
editions is that the note regarding the errata (which in the first edition affords evidence 
as to the authorship) is omitted in the pirated second, the errata being corrected. He 
also states that a list of the twelve barons who carried ‘bannerols’ at the funeral was 
inserted in ‘The order and proceeding’ in that edition. 
{This ornament which closely resembles McK.n.369, is of common occurrence in English printing although 

probably of continental origin. The numerous castings or copies differ only slightly. The earliest use in 
this collection is in 1585, in Tottel Songes and Sonnets, printed by Windet; the latest is in 1671, in Caryll 

Sir Saloman, printed by Newcombe. 

VOL.I [ 181 ]

The present pamphlet is written partly in prose and partly in verse, and on the whole 
is an interesting and well written tribute to ‘the right gratious Queene Elizabeth.’ One 
portion which is particularly attractive describes at some length the character and 
virtuous qualities of the Queen illustrating the discourse with anecdotes. The whole is 
written in the form of a dialogue, partly in verse, between Thenot and Collin, and in 
the usual ‘The king is dead! Long live the king!’ fashion ends with the Spring Song 
‘in gratulation. . . to. . . James.’ 
The present value of this book, however, lies not so much apparently in its intrinsic 
merit, as in the fact that in one place Chettle complains that the poets ‘that are best 
able, scarce remember her Maiestie . . . . Nor doth one Poet seeke her name to raise, 
That liuing hourely striu’d to sing her praise’ being too intent upon welcoming the 
Stuartt. He goes on and reproaches several, Daniel, Warner, Chapman, Jonson, Shake- 
speare, Drayton and others not by name, but by allusions to their works. For example, 
he calls upon Shakespeare under the name of Melicert to 
‘remember our Elizabeth, 
And sing her Rape, done by that Tarquin, Death.’ 
Ten other copies have been traced, of which several are imperfect for since the Shep- 
heards Spring Song is mentioned on the title its omission in the text cannot be explained 
by calling a copy lacking it an early issue. The present location of the Britwell copy 
is not known; nor, unless it is the Harvard copy, that of the W. Wiper (Sotheby’s 16 
January 1891)-T.J.McKee (Dec. 1901, Lot 2810) copy. The Grenville (imperfect) and 
Fillingham-Heber copies are in the British Museum, the Malone in the Bodleian, the 
Huth in the Huntington, the Walpole-Britwell-Halliwell (Calendar No.s, imperfect) 
and the Halliwell-Locker in the Folger, the Halliwell-White at Harvard, and a copy 
(sold at Hodgson’s in 1933) in the possession of Bernard Quaritch Ltd. 

fit is an interesting fact that though some sixteen broadsides and pamphlets were issued in 1603 to com- 

memorate the death of the Queen, two at least being collections, they do not include anything from the 
first rank of the so-called Elizabethan poets. 

S.T.C. 5121. Corser Collectanea Il, 350. CoLLier Bridgewater Cat. (1837) 59. HuntincTon 
C.L., 79. W.A.WHITE Car., 23. Locker Car. (1886) 16. Ciawson Car., 45. BARTLETT 
Mr.W.S,. No.281. Hutu Car. I, 309. Hazuitt, 100.