MS.1f BENTLEY,   Ricuaro to the Rev. Henry Dodwell. 
          A.L.S. 
          10 MAY 1698 
          Sr, JAMES’S 

               Descaiprion:  Paper, octavo, two.leaves, blank pp.2-3, with seal. 
               Provenance:   John Young  (1869, Lot 67) —Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2697). 

             TRANSCRIPT:                          At the Library at St Jamef’s May § roth 1698. 
              Honoured  fir, In M¥  Boyle’s Examination of my difcourfe upon Phalaris’s Epistlest 
             (ws  I prefume you have feen) you are more than once cited and appealed to, as having 

            VOL.III                           [ 1153 ]

proved  the Age of phalaris to be recenter than Chronologers have yet thought of, even 
                           as low as y® LXX‘   Olympiad.  The  Book, wherein  you are faid to prove this, is not 
                           yet come  from the preff?; and I find I cannot procure a fight of it without your per- 
                           miffion. This therfore is to beg ¥ favour, yt you would give your order to y® Printer at 
                           Oxford  to fend me yt fheet, wherein you {peak of Phalaris. If I am convinced by your 
                           reafons; I fhall be very ready to own my miftake, and to give you publick thanks for 
                           y® information. Or if I fhall be ftill fo unhappy, as to differ from you in opinion; I shall 
                           offer my reafons for it, with yt deference & refpect, yt is juftly due to your eminent 
                           Learning.  Not doubting, fir, but you will grant me this reafonable requeft, I defire ¥ 
                           favour of one Line by the next poft to tell me, when I may expect it. 
                                                           Y" very humble  fert 
                                                             Rich: Bentley. 

                          ApprEss, p.4: For the Hon®d M? Dodwell at Shottsbroke near Maidenhead Berkfhire. 

                              Notes:  1 Dr. Bentley's Dissertations on the Epistles of Phalaris and the Fables of Hsop examin’d 
                                  by the Honourable Charles Boyle, Esq; London, 1698. This attack was written  by Francis 
                                   Atterbury, George Smalridge, Robert Freind, John Freind, and Anthony Alsop, all of Christ 
                                   Church College Oxford. 
                                 2 De Veteribus Graecorum Romanorumque   Cyclis Oxford, 1701. 
                                 3 Bentley acknowledged  the sight of Dodwell’s MS.  in his much  enlarged  edition of his 
                                   Dissertation London, 1699. He was not convinced.