MS.35F 

             EVELYN,     Joun   to Samuel   Pepys.’ 
             A.L.S. 
             31 JULY  1685 
             SAYES  COURT 
             Description: Paper, 2 leaves, quarto, pp.2-3 blank, with seal. 
             PROVENANCE: See MS.35D. Sold Morrison sale (IV, 1919, Lot 2822). 

            VOL.UI                         [ 1211 ]

Appress, p.4: For Sam!] Pepys Esq": SectY of the AdmitY: at the Admiralty in Yorke- 
                               Buildings. 

                               Transcript:  S} You have rightly judg’d?, and I concurr with you, that the Indignity 
                               has ben don me, and the lofse fustain’d, is not to be put in Balance, with that incom- 
                               parable Child you are pleaf’d to mention, as (fome time or other) I may to ¥ admiration 
                               shew you: But  thefe two difasters falling fo vpon the neck of each other, Cicatricem 
                               voluctam refricat, and afresh exasperate the almost obduced wound. I greately defpize 
                               the vnworthy  Action; but there is an appendant difshonor in it hard to digest, as it 
                               expofes to the contempt & prate of Goffhips, and is a reproch to an vnfpotted family 
                               of worthy Relations, and the pitty of fome among whom I haue  had the honor to be 
                               esteem’d: I blame ¥ wretchd folly of an abufed Girle; a child of fo many precepts, and 
                               (thé I fay it) examples of a virtuous and orderly family, & who had fo little reafon to 
                               cast her-felfe away in this manner: But I no leffe abhorr the meane stratagem, of the 
                               betrayers and vnworthy Abettors: In my Life was I neuer addicted to Revenge (efpe- 
                               cially on meane perfons) nor am’ I confcious to my-felfe of euer hauing merited the 
                               least vn-neighbourly office from any Creature in his Mati Gard, every one of which 
                               I haue ben allways difpofd to ferve, & oblige vpon all occafsions to my power; thé 
                               Indeede I do not ordinarylie Club with them, nor haue ben v{’d to the Converfation: 
                               This onely S; I promife my-felfe, that thofe Welsh Gent here, who I am told boast of 
                               their afsistance, and feacresy in this wondrous Exploit shall not often Feast vpon the 
                               Entertainements  this greate purchafe is likely to procure them: M! Tippet has but to 
                               Confult the Will of his greate Heyrefs’s Grandfather* (which he may  perufe at the 
                               probate-Office for a groate) to find the thoufands he gives out she has title to: I had 
                               almost five-years fince given her 2000£ (and did now intend to haue improv’d it) which 
                               I haue struck out of my Will, this very afternoone: In the meane time S, Your hand- 
                               fome, & noble Refent’ments for me are still fo honorable and Obliging, as can proceede 
                               from  none but a breast truely Generous & worthy  a brave  mind,  and for which  I 
                               shall euer cherish, publish, and owne your Friendship as becomes 
                                                               st 
                               Says Cot:                          YT ever most obliged, 
                               31 July—8s.                          & most humble  fervant 
                                                                      I Euelyn: 

                                     Nores:  1 Unprinted. 
                                       2 Pepys’s letter is not extant. 

                                     3 Apparently  the abductor was an officer quartered at Deptford. 
                                      4 Sir Richard Browne.