THE GOSYNHILL FLYTING 

Tus literature of the Middle Ages is prolific in warnings against marriage, in tales of 
domestic discord and in satires upon women. In England most of these are scarcely 
more than translations from the German and, especially, the French Buranic verse. 
Their popularity in the early sixteenth century may be attested by the number which 
Wynkyn de Worde considered worth his while to print. Later in the century numerous 
pieces of the same tradition but only in part based upon the earlier exempla and jest- 
books continued to feed the popular interest. Many of these later works were published 
in the form of broadside ballads and hence, the greater part are now known only by their 
entry in the Stationers’ Register. Of the mid-sixteenth century poetical tracts of this 
order The Schole house of women is perhaps the most representative, certainly at the 
time of publication it aroused the greatest interest being reprinted at least twice and 

probably three times. 
The edition ($.T.C. 12104) ascribed to Walter Lynne but which, according to Col, Isaac, was apparently 

printed by R.Jugge 1557-8, is not an edition of this book but a quite different tract in the form of “A 
godly dialogue or communication of two Systers [Justina and Serapia; with an address to the Reader 

by WeLynnel.’. 

VOL.IL [ 401 ]

Despiteits tile the Scholehouseis merely a diatribe in rhyme-royal against ‘femynye! 
but itis distinguished by considerable narrative if not poetic skill though borrowing 
freely from the Quinze joyes de mariage and the C.Mery Talys, (see outline in C.H.E.L, 
II, 100). The medieval vigour of this denunciation, though to the popular taste, 
brought forth three refutations; the four books together forming what may be called, 
for want of better name, the Gosynhill yting. It is no small triumph that copies of all 
four of these very rare works are here garnered. 
Before discussing the several books, it should be observed that though lacking in the 
personal abuse of the usual literary quarrel, possibly because the various contributors 
were not very well known to each other, it still retains the conventional characteristics 
of the more widely known ‘disputacyons’. Thus the authors’ comments regarding these 
books and themselves may well be merely part of the pleasant fictions of dreams and 
dialogues with which they are filled, but if we are denied such evidence as may be 
derived from these statements we must forego any attempt to elucidate the many 
obscure points of this controversy for there is no evidence except internal. 
The first edition of the Schole house may have been an undated duodecimo edition 
printed by Robert Wyer of which no copy is now known. That such an edition was 
actually printed, however, seems assured by the fact that Ames, followed by Herbert, 
Dibdin and Hazlitt, described it with particularity. In Ames’s sale catalogue, 1760, 
Lot 870, among the ‘Octavo et infra’, occurs a book entitled “Here begynneth a lytell 
Boke named the Scole howse, wherein every Man may rede a goodly prayse of the 
condycions of Women.’ which is probably a copy of the edition in question.t It seems 
probable that this now untraceable edition was issued about 1540, because the edition 
printed by Thomas Petit in 1541tt contains a reference to Gosynhill’s Prayse of all 
women ‘A fole of late, contryued a boke . . . Pehan he calleth it . . . ’ which since 
the Prayse was written in answer to the Schole house would appear to be an interpolation 
in the second or later editions. However, since ‘contryued’ does not necessarily mean 
‘printed’ it may be that the ‘boke’ referred to was in manuscript as the third stanza of 
the Prayse seems to infer, ‘. . . Sende forth fome other . . . The Pean thou wrote, 
and lyeth the{e] bye . . . '. It is at least possible that both volumes were planned 
and written before the publication of either. 
About this same time but presumably after the publication of at least one edition of 
the Schole house and certainly after sth July 1541 when he was admitted a freeman, 
William Middleton brought out The prayse of all women as a refutation of the Schole 
house. In an author’s note at the end Edward Gosynhill declares himself to be responsi- 

  

Hn Herbert's annotated copy of his Typographical Antiquities, now in the British Museum, he has recorded 

pe ye dition has a tile page border composed of naked women (je. McKerrow and Ferguson 
0.25). 

Petits edition is dated on the title ‘1541" and in the colophon ‘1561° 

ve ene, 
Be a cert date is doubtless the correct one, The placing of the Petit edition, which is in quarto, 
after the Wyer edition, which is in duodecimo, contraverts the usual o 

is d 
only by the sie 2 der of such formats and is excuse 
‘iy the argument given above, The discovery of the Wyer edition would quickly settle the question. 

but since Petit ceased printing in 

  

  

[ 402 ]

ble for this work and yet, surprisingly enough, in the second stanza of the text a 
fodeyne affemble’ in a dream accuses the author of having also written the Schole 

house: « . a boke, that lately is past 

Whyche by reporte, by thele] was fyrst framed 
The scole of women, none auctour named 
In prynte it is passed, lewdely compyled 
All women wherby be sore reuyled.” 
This, accepted at its face value, would seem to indicate that Gosynhill wrote on both 
sides of this controversey although, if so, he refers to himself, the author of the ‘Pean’, 
as a ‘fole’ which, however, need not cause too much concern. A comparison of the two 
tracts reveals a decided similarity of style, both being in rhyme-royal and both show- 
ing approximately the same easy command of the doggerel-like verse. As to Gosynhill’s 
identity, however, nothing seems to be known§. 
In 1542 appeared another answer to the Schole house entitled ‘A dyalogue defensyue 
for women, agaynst malycyous detractoures’ (q.v.], which from the fact that both the 
dedication and the address to the reader are signed ‘Robert Vaghane’ has caused this 
work to be attributed to someone of that name, though variously spelled. The fact 
that Vaughan disclaims the work as his own has been disregarded as but the conven- 
tional disclaimer of one not a professional writer, however, Miss White (op. cif. II, 
165-9) has pointed out that this book contains several acrostics one of which gives the 
name ‘Robert Burdet’ twice. As a ballad-writer of that name is known (S.T.C. 4104) 
it is possible that it is he who was the author of this poem. The Dyalogue is between a 
Fawcon and a Pye with occasional discursions by the author who narrates the whole. 
The ‘argumentacyon’ both for and against the ‘woman’ is derived chiefly from the Bible 
and from classical authors. 
For the time being the dispute was allowed to rest but some seventeen years later 
John King considered the Schole house [q.v-] of sufficient interest to have it entered in 
the Stationers’ Register (Arber 1.75). Evidently King’s right to the copy was legiti- 
mately obtained for the title compartment (McKerrow and Ferguson n.37 6) which 
he used when printing it in 1560 had also previously belonged to Petitfa so that King 
apparently acquired at least some of both the furniture and copyrights belonging to 
Petit’s estate. Although it was in 1557-8 that King entered for his copy in the Schole 
house the only known edition of that book bearing King’s imprint is dated 1560. How- 
ever, this does not preclude the possibility that he printed another earlier edition; on 
the contrary, there is some reason to believe that he had, for, shortly after his entry for 
the Schole house, King made another entry (Arber 1.79) for a Defense of swomen which 
presumably refers to Edward More's ‘A lytle and bryefe treatyse called the defense of 

§Miss Beatrice White has suggested (Huntington Bulletin 11, 168) that a certain ‘Pike’ may have been the 
author of the Schole house, The evidence is not wholly convincing. 
jaMr.F.S.Ferguson (Quaritch Cat, 369 No.1082) has pointed out that this compartment with the initials 
“TP’ in both tablets and sill was used by Petit in his edition of Longlande’s ‘Sermone made before the 
Kynge . . . at grenewiche . . . 1537’ [21538] (S.T.C. 16796). 

VOL.II [ 403 J

women’ [q.v.] which King also printed in 1560.42 Now in the dedicatory epistle of that 
work, dated 20th July 1557, More explains that having come across a copy of the 
Schole house at the book-sellers he was so outraged by its tenor and argument that he 
was impelled to write this rejoinder. Of course it is possible that the copy which More 
found was of an earlier edition but in view of the fact that the entry for his book was 
made just a few months later in the same year as the entry for the Schole house, makes 
it seem more reasonable to suppose that King had published an edition of Gosynhill’s 
book at the time of his entry for it. The fact that no copy of such an edition is known 
need not be considered as affecting the argument materially for of the three known 
editions of the Schole house two are represented by unique copies and the third just 
misses that distinction by one. Nevertheless, as noted above, the character of this 
evidence must be considered. 
As in the case of Gosynhill and Burdet or Vaughan the identity of the author of this 
reply is obscure. However, the dedication of the book to a secretary of Sir Philip Hoby 
gives some information. In the first place, More says of himself that he was but twenty 
years old in 1557, and, in the second, that in some fashion or other, probably remote 
considering his youth, he was connected with Hoby’s circle which included Sir John 
Mason, Sir Richard Moryson, Thomas Paynell and Sir John Cheke, a group which was 
prominent in the introduction of renaissance culture into England (cf. Underhill Span- 
ish literature in the England of the Tudors, pp.g0-g). Such a connection would explain 
the author’s reaction to the Schole house. 
John King appears to have interested himself rather heavily in the books of this 
controversy for besides the Schole house and More’s Defense he also reprinted Gosyn- 
hill’s Prayse of all womentfa (q.v.]. 
As to the date of the King edition of the Prayse very little evidence can be adduced 
for the state of the block used on the title is not conclusive. It is usually dated [15607] 
and there seems no good reason to doubt that it was printed about that time. This much 
may be deposed, however, that when More wrote his Defense the name of the author 
of the Schole house was unknown to him and, therefore, assuming that if King’s edition 
of the Prayse had been printed he would have seen it and would have learned from it 
the identity of the author of both works, which is somewhat presuming, the date of 
King’s edition of the Defense establishes a terminus a quo. This, of course, does not by 

taThough this edition of 1560 is the only one known it might well be suspected of being a reprint for each 
page of the last sheet has 36 lines instead of 35 as in the other two sheets while the colophon is crowded in 
without ornament in just such a way as would be natural in compressing a reprint so as to eliminate a 
final half-sheet. 
Halt is interesting to note that they were all issued with their titles in the same compartment which King 
used in an edition of the Proude Wyues Pater Noster which he printed in 1560, This fact lends to these 
editions a superficial uniformity which is contradicted by the fact that the paper is different in each and 
the font of type used in the Prayse differs from that used in the Schole house and the Defense. The state- 
ment made in the C:H.E.L. III, 1o1, that King's editions of these two last were issued together in one 
volume is probably based upon the fact that the British Museum copies occur bound together in a volume 
of tracts [C.20.¢.31(2-3)] which has been described by Dr. Stein Trans. XV (1934) 38-48. 

[ 404 ]

any means resolve all the difficulties for there is the possibility, even the probability, 
that, as noted above, one or more editions of these books, no copies of which are known, 
were printed.