MS.141 GUTHRIE, JOHN, Bishop of Moray (d. 1649) to Provost of Edinburgh.
A.L.S.
8JANUARY 1624
ELGIN 

                 Description:   Paper,  two leaves, folio, pp.2-3 blank, with seal. 

               Provenance:   Alfred Morrison  (IV, 1919, Lot 2814). 

             ADDRESS,  p.4: To ye  Rgt Hono!   My Lord  Proueft And bailzies of ye burgh of Ed. 
             Theis. 

              Transcript:   Ryt Hond             It may ples you According to ye defyre of yot lettr 
              I haue written to mé Ro?  Barone! to giue you fatiffactioune, how lest ye weather has 
              bin & as yet  continues in yir bounds? fo extraordinar as I fuppos he fall hardlie be 
              induced to tak iourney vntill ye aire be moir temperate & ye way moir paffable: I will 
              furthr yis yo" fuite y** he may be heard bi yor people, becaus I know ye importunitie 
              of ye multitude yat can not bi other wayes ftilled, But (as I haue told fome of yo" no 
              already ) yo" difcretioune will carie you to mak choyfe of another for yo" miniftire, 
              fens ye Wound   yat  yir boundes  has fuftained already by ye uewing of two  is yet 
              greene, And yee haue  meanes  to cure by ye whos transportaue will do les preiudice to 
              ye places wharfra ye are lifted & be moir fteadable to you These I will look for at yo" 
              handis, and earneftlie pray to god yat he may provyde for you fuch as in soubrietie of 
              heart may  do his work among   you, & direct yo" eyes & eafe yo" lot or charge. To his 
              care I moft heartlie commend  you  & w'} all devotion & affectioune fall remaine 
                                                yo's to ye vttermoft of my power 
                                                  Jo: B. of Moray. 
              Elgine 
              8. Jan. 1624. 

               Nores:  1 Rey. Robert  Baron  (1593?-1639), at the time minister in Aberdeen. 
                  2 Note 0.E.D.  instances of the Scottish use of this word as a territorial substantive.