PETTIE,   G[eorce]  (1548-1589). 
                         A petite Pallace | of Pettie his pleafure: | Contapnpng manp pretie WHpt- 
                         tories | by him fet foorth in comely colours, | and moft delightéullp dit- | 
                         toured. | [printer's device, McK.n.188a] | Orne tulit punctum, | qui mif- 
                         cuit otile dulci. | [in broad border of type-ornament] 

794 

                                 Couopxion: Printed at London, by Richard]. {atkins}. [1576] | 
                                First EDITION. Quarto. Black  Letter. 
                                Coutation:  A-Ff*; 116 leaves. 

                                 Cowrewns:   title, recto [A]; verso blank; ad-   The  Printer to all Readers,  recto [A4]; argu- 
                                 dress, To  The  Gentlewomen   Readers,  in ro-  ment,  verso [Aq]; text, Pp-1-224;  colophon, p. 
                                 man,  signed ‘R.B.’, Sig A2; the Letter of G.P. 224. (P.17  is numbered  19, 214 is 215, and 215 
                                 to R.B,, in italic, signed ‘G.P.’, Sig A3; note, is 214). 

                              Old calf, extra, sprinkled edges. 734 x 44 inches. The Bindley (III, 1819, Lot 1002) —Heber 
                              (VI, 1835, Lot 2794) —Britwell (June 1920, Lot 243) — Clawson (II, 1926, Lot 635) copy with 
                              Clawson bookplate and Heber note on fiyleaf. 

                            TueERre are four undated editionst of this work all purporting to have been printed by 

                             R[ichard]. W[atkins]. Arranged in the order of publication, with location  of known 
                             copies, they are: 

                                   FSince one of these is known only by a solitary copy, and since an entry to Francis Burton in the Stationers’ 
                                     Register (11 March  160s, Arber 111.284) mentions a now  unknown   ‘impression’ of which  copies still 
                                     remained unsold at that time in the hands of [John?] Norton, it is not unlikely that one or more editions 
                                     were issued which are not extant, Whether such editions were dated or bore the name of another printer 
                                     or publisher is not even a subject for conjecture, However, the edition for which the Burton entry was 
                                     made  was probably never issued on account of the terms which Norton exacted; but an edition mentioned 
                                    by  Warton  and Wood  as printed by James Roberts in 1598, though no copy is known, may actually have 
                                     been issued for Roberts was at one time in partnership with Watkins, that is, unless one is to believe that 
                                     the date and printer were both imagined by Warton, 
                                   {These editions presumably were printed during the period 1576-1 598, but other than that they were prob- 
                                     ably regularly spaced it is impossible to date them even approximately. Their spacing, also, may have 
                                     been affected by the publication of other editions no longer known,                 , 

[ 814 ]

tthe   belief that this was the Steevens copy appears to be based upon a misreading of a manuscript note 
                still retained in the book. 
             §This letter is reprinted from the copy th 
                Epistles, pp.38-40, edited by Hazlitt for Huth. 

                                                        en in the possession of R.S.Turner in the Prefaces, Dedications and 

        VOL.                       [ 815 ]

The second edition is typographically remarkable for, unlike the three other undated 
                             editions, it has none of Watkins’s devices or ornaments on the title (reproduced Dodd 
                             Mead  The Rowfant Books [1906] p.62) so that it might not unreasonably, upon a super. 
                             ficial inspection, be suspected of being a Pirated edition. This linipreseion is heightened 
                             by the fact that, unlike all the other editions, it does not have Watkins’s prefatory note 
                             (recto [Aq] of present). However, a closer examination reveals the presence of two 
                             factotums which were the joint property of Thomas  Dawson   and Richard  Gardiner, 
                             trade-printers who were employed by Watkins  to print at least three other booksta, 
                             Where the readings of Edition I differ from III and IV, the second edition usually has 
                             the readings of the first in those cases where the differences are purely literal, but at the 
                            same  time it has the long interpolationsta, which appear in the later editions. 
                               The evidence regarding the relative order of the third and fourth editions is some- 
                            what  simplertta. On the titles of both Watkins used a device (McK.n.188) which in the 
                            interval between printing them he had altered§@ by excising the shading. 
                               Six editions, seven counting Warton’s, in less than forty years is no mean achieve- 
                            ment  for a purely literary work of this period, unless indeed it is compared with the 
                            popularity of Lyly’s novels. Furthermore, it shows that Pettie’s work was not so over- 
                            shadowed  and forgotten upon the appearance of Lyly’s as has usually been supposed. 
                               The importance of Pettie in the history of English prose style is not always recog- 
                            nized. In discussing the origin and development of English euphuism J.D. Wilson (John 
                            Lyly 1905, pp.40-2) says: “ . . . No one, reading the Petite Pleasure, can doubt that 
                            Pettie was the real creator of euphuism in its fullest development, and that Lyly was 
                            only animitator . . . The sole difference between the styles of Lyly and Pettie is that, 
                            while Pettie’s similes from nature are simple and natural, Lyly, with his knowledge of 
                            Pliny and the bestiaries, added his fabulous ‘unnatural natural history’ . . . In truth, 

  

                                    faln 1577 these two partners printed Breton’s Workes of a young wyt with a title having the same peculiar 
                                      format as the second edition of Pettie. It is of interest, though perhaps of no great significance, to note 
                                      that the original entry for Breton’s book was also made by Richard Watkins, 
                                    JeAmounting  altogether to nearly two pages of text and mainly consisting of somewhat specifically cynical 
                                      remarks concerning chastity, matrimony and other matters hymeneal. 
                                        At least one rather unaccountable reading appeared in Edition IT which was perpetuated  in the later 
                                      ones. The second paragraph  of Amphiaraus  and  Eriphile begins in Edition  I: ‘Fabritius, an ancient 
                                      Romain .  . . ’, which is correct; while in Editions I-IV it begins: ‘Valerius, an auncient in 111 and 1V 
                                      ‘ancient'] Romain . . . ' which by no ordinary rule can be called a corruption. 
                                   Halt  should be noted that the present order is not that set forth by Sir Israel Gollancz in his edition of this 
                                     work  but the reverse. Nevertheless, his notes further substantiate this order for, where the readings of 
                                      Editions III and IV differ, almost always III has the readings of I, and IV has those of the edition of 1608. 
                                      Gollancz numbers Edition III ‘C’ and IV ‘B’. Edition II was not known to him. 
                                   §alt has not been possible to date this alteration except to state that it evidently occurred before 1598) 
                                     when  Watkins  ceased activity. Moreover, the compartment,  McK.   and  F.n.141, which  Watkins   used 
                                     on  the title of Edition IIT did not come into his possession until 1 579. In both of these editions, also, a 
                                     large ornamental initial was used on recto 2, as well as a neat tailpiece on verso, which were at one time 
                                     the property of John Charlewood whose  widow  in 1 $93 married James Roberts,  partner at that time of 
                                      Watkins, Therefore, a date after 1593 and before 1598 is probable, 

  

[ 816 ]

S.T.C. 19819.   ARBER  IT. gor.  Hok  Car. III (1903) 293. Haztrrr,  455.