App.4 

H., W., Gent. 
ENGLANDS | SORROWE | OR, | A Farewell to Effex: | With | A 
Commemoration of the famous Liues, and | vntimely Deaths of many 
woorthie Perfona- | ges which haue liued in England. | By W.H.Gent. | 
The Contents follow in the next Page. | [ornament, vase with scrolls] | 
LONDON | Printed for Henry Rocket, and are to be fold at the | long 
Shoppe in the Poultrie under | the Dyall. 1606. | 

  

Cotopxon: Printed at London by Valentine | Simmes. 1605. | 

FIRST EDITION. Quarto. 

Cottation: A(the first, probably blank, lacking)-K4(the last, probably blank, lacking); 38 leaves 
present. 

Contents: title, recto [A2]; The Contentsf, tainet, recto B-verso K; The Conclusion, recto 
in italic, verso; To the discrete Reader, recto K2; A Defence against Envy, verso K2-recto 
A353 The Author to his Booke, verso A3-verso K3; colophon, recto K3; verso blank. 
[Aq]; text, headed: The Lamentation of Bri- 

Unbound, removed from volume of tracts, traces of seventeenth century calf on spine, 734 x 54 
inches. From the Dalrymple Library at Newhailes, Musselburgh (1937, Lot 171). 

THIS poem is written in the same seven-line stanzas, ababbcc, as A prophesie of 
Cadwallader 1604 by William Harbert, or Herbert. The treatment of the subjects is 

{The Contents include: ‘1 Robert Earl 
4 Robert Dudley Erle of Leicester. 5 
8 Thomas Howard Duke of Norffolk 
12 Sir Thomas Wyat. 13 Queene 
17 Lord Grey.’, 
The headlines of this section read on each page ‘Honours Epitaphs.. This was the title under which this 

book was entered in the Stationers’ Register, 30 April 1605 (Arber III. 287); “The Lamentation of Brit- 
taine’ was the secondary title, see below. , 

le of Essex. 2 Sir Walter Deuoreux. 3 Elizabeth Queene of England. 
Sir Phillip Sidney. 6 Sir William Cecill. 7 Henry Earle of Penbrooke. 
€. 9 Prince Arthur. 10 Henry the fift. 1 William Earle of Pembrooke. 
Mary. 14 Earle of Worcester. 15 Earle of Rutland. 16 Lord Clinton. 

[ xxiv ]

much the same. Sir Philip Sidney is made a good deal of in both, and it is probable 
that one could list a number of parallel lines and phrases. They both reveal about the 
same mastery of this kind of verse, e.g. in the Cadwallader, verso [Gg], one of the 
stanzas on ‘The losse of Elizabeth’: 
Bright Gem of honor, Albions glorious starre, 
The Cynosure of Englands Hemispheare: 
Princesse of peace, Cytherian queene of warre, 
Rides through the cloudes on her caelestiall beare, 
Conquering deathes Ebon dart and sharpest speare. 
Father of peace put on triumphant weedes, 
A gratious King, a gratious Queene succeedes. 
which may be compared in the present with one of the stanzas of ‘A memoriall of our 
late renowned Elizabeth’, verso [C4]: 
Thy glories I admire, celestiall starre, 
Earthes ornament, whom heaven smiles to see, 
Wonder of women, Queene of peace and warre, 
Elizabeth, Saint, daine me leave to bee 
Thy honours trumpe, sith no man speakes of the: 
Sleepe still bright Angel, for thy head shall have 
A Crowne in heaven, though on the earth a gravett. 
Mr. Ulric Nisbet has recently sought to prove that the author of Cadwallader is 
Sir William Herbert of Red Castle, who was made a Knight of the Bath in 1603 and 
Earl of Powis in 1629§. His identification rests upon the use by Nicholas Breton, in 
the dedication of his Wits trenchmour 1597 to Sir William Herbert of Red Castle, of the 
proverb ‘to make a large gate of a little Towne’, and its appearance also in Cadwallader, 
ll.15-17, verso B3: 
Least that my Gates be wider then my towne, 
And that Diogines my folly see: 
My proems prologue Ile set quickly downe’ . . . . 
But, as Prof.A.W.Baldwin has pointed out (7.Z.S. 12 June 1937) in both cases the 
reference is to a well known story of Diogenes who told the citizens of the small town 
of Minda to shut their ‘mightie great gates, that the towne run not out’. It probably 
also was current in the form of a proverb although it is not listed in any of the collec- 
tions we have consulted. However, it is recorded, it is true at a slightly later date, in 

t#On this same subject the author has included a Spenser reference which is apparently unrecorded, 1I.3-5, 
verso [C4]: 
A hundred tongues they be too few I weene, 
To trump such fame; grave Spenser live a space, 
And leave the grave, this monument to grace: 
In the Cadwallader there is another reference, !.9, verso H2: 
Spenser the Muses sonne and sole delight: 
The metre used in both these poems is the one that Spenser used in his Hymnes. 
§ The Onlie Begetter Longmans, 1936, an attempt to identify the ‘Mr.W.H.’ of Shakespeare’s Sonnets. See 
also London Times Literary Supplement 12 and 19 June 1937. 

[ ev ]

the form: ‘Make not the door wider than the house’, while its use by Breton and the 
author of Cadwallader seems very slight evidence upon which to build such a structure, 
Indeed, it is hardly possible, whoever else he may have been, that the author of 
Cadwallader was Sir William Herbert of Red Castle for in the second dedication to 
Sir Philip Herbert (Cadwallader 1.7, verso 1) the author says ‘These Poems which my 
infant labours send’a. Sir William was no infant in 1604; he was born 1572-3. The 
author also says of Christ Church College Oxford, Il.1-2, verso G3: 
Nurse of ingenious spirits Athens praise, 
Chiefe benefactor of what ere is mine: 
which might be construed as indicating that he was an alumnus of that college. Sir 
William Herbert of Red Castle is not known to have attended either university. 
Furthermore, William Gamage (Linsie Woolsie 1613, Century II, Epigram 92) ad- 
dressed the author of Cadwallader, ‘To the ingenious Poet, Mr. William Herbert of his 
booke intituled the Prophesie of Cadwalader’. Sir William Herbert of Red Castle was 
made a Knight of the Bath in 1603. 
There is, on the other hand, a ‘William Herbert, probably son of William Herbert 
of Glamorgan’ who, according to Sir Sidney Lee, would have been no more than 21 
years of age in 1604, who matriculated at Christ Church College in 1600, and who 
apparently was never knighted. But whether or not the particular William Herbert 
who wrote Cadwallader can be identified, it seems not unlikely that he was the author 
of the present ‘Epitaphs’. 
The title under which this work was originally entered by Rocket was: ‘Honors 
Epitaphes or the Lamentation of Brittaine for the vntimely Losse of many woorthie 
late personages whiche haue lyued in this Isle’. Just why the title was altered to 

emphasize the Earl of Essex (only eight pages of text are devoted to him) can only 
be conjecturedta. 

faSir Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke, was first cousin to Sir William Herbert of Red Castle, but 
nowhere in the Cadwallader is any mention of this relationship. In the present work, verso 12, four stanzas 
are devoted to an eulogy of William, rst Earl of Pembroke, in which, likewise, there is no mention of 
relationship. 
talt may be, however, that the suppression of Robert Pricket’s Honors fame in triumph riding 1604 may 
have caused Rocket to alter the title in order to attract purchasers who might think little of a mere 
poetical lamentation. The suppression is noted in Hist. MSS. Com. Rep. 10, App. 2, 1885, p.92, ina letter 
from F.Morice to Sir B. Gawdy, 7 June 1604, which reads: ‘Morice also sends a lately published poem 
concerning the whole life and death of the late Earl of Essex . . . well and feelingly written and I think 
will not hereafter to be had as they are already called in and the printer called in question’. 
; After Elizabeth’s death several pieces were published concerning the late Earl of Essex. Bacon’s 4polo- 
Sie [q-v.] went through several editions, 4n apologie of the Earle of Essex 1603, was the subject of con- 
ine! te the wardens of the Stationers’ Company between Richard Bradock, the printer, and John 
es oe — 6 August 1604, to pay Smethwick five pounds in settlement). That 
ae cragaal wats a ae and Published at Middleburgh in 1603, and several manuscript copies of 
ihesheh gf ig! 7 jee nown, e.g. Huntington and R.Redmond. 4 lamentable dittie composed upon 
ou of Essex 1603 went through at least two editions. Judging by the popularity 

of the foregoing, it i ‘ ‘ * i 
avis aa 's possible that ‘Essex’ was still, in 1606, a name which might help to sell such a volume 

[ xxvi ]

Although, in ‘The Author to his Booke’, ‘H.W.Gent.’ says: ‘I knowe these lines are 
bad’, they are certainly no worse than much of the contemporary poetry which has 
been thought worthy of reprinting and one may well believe that the reason they have 
not been rescued from obscurity is probably because, hitherto, the only copy known 
was in the Bodleian Library. 

S.T.C. 12582. Hazzirr 249.