MS.129 DOLBEN, JOHN Archbishop of York, to Hentry Thynne.
A.L.S.
24 NOVEMBER  [1683-5]! 

                   DescripTion:   Paper,  two leaves, folio, p.2 blank, with armorial seal. 

                PRovENANcE:  Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2814). 
                Appress:  For Mf  Henry  Thynne  at the L4 Keepers house in Queenes street London. 

                TranscripT:   S*            I returne you my  hearty  thanks for yo" Kind  Lett’, & 
                beseech you  to oblige me  further by p'fenting my most humble  fervice & thanks to 
                my  L4 Keeper,  I will not trouble his LP my felf till the Man be dead, As yet he is not 
                foe, though  fcarce alive. The Refignation yu mencon  was indeed nev" offred to me. 
                The  perfon Concernd  being advifd not to doe it, as being affured I would not [‘Permit’ 
                deleted] accept a Refignation in articulo Mortis. Nevertheleffe some bodies ignorance 
                brought  it to y" complying wt   ye Kindneffes of the Parish to M' Platts, who hath 
                bin neere 2 years  Curate to ye fickly Rector. I haue enformd my  felf of ye Man, & 
                find him  to deferve a much  Better employment, it is but 6! pfer] An®: befide the free 
                bounty  of his Parifhioners. Upon the whole Matter  I beleive it will be well bestowed 
                upon  him. But  give me leave to confid" my felf foe farre as to fay it will be a litle for 
                my  advantage   if you rebuke  his Solicitor at p'fent upon his bringing fuch a lame 
                refignation, & intimate that my  L4  Keeper will haue fome regard to my recomhenda- 
                tions & the  Character I fhall give of Men. I will ferve him faithfully (as I grow able 
                by degrees)  & will make good  ufe of foe much Countenance given to 
                                                   Deare {* yo" moft affectionate 
                                                     old frend & faithful ferv® 
                                                       Joh Ebor. 
                Nov:  24. 

               Enporsep,  p.4: Arch Bip of Yorke on behalfe of M" Platt & MF Halley 

                 Nore:  1 Dolben did not become  Archbishop of York until 1683 and the Marquis of Halifax, 
                      to whom  the addressee was apparently secretary, gave up the seals in 1685.