RALEIGH,   S1r WatTeER. 
                       A | DECLARATION    | OF THE DEMEA-|   NOR   AND  CARIAGE    OF | 
                       SIR WALTER    RALEIGH,   | Knight, afwell in his Voyage, as | in, and 
                       fithence his Returne; | 4nd of the true motiues and induce- | ments which 
                       occafioned His Maieftie | to Proceed in doing Iustice vpon him, | as hath 
                       bene done. | [printers’ device, McK.n.248] | [rule] | LONDON, | Printed 
                       by BONHAM     NORTON  |  and IOHN   BILL, Printers to the | Kings 
                       most Excellent Maieftie. | M.DC.XVIIL. | [rule] | 

819 

                                   First EDITION; variant C. Quarto. 
                                   Coxtation:  A?(the first, a blank signed in factotum, lacking); A-H*; 1?; 35 leaves present. 

                                     Contents:   title, recto [A2]; cut, royal arms, Steele Proclamations 11, 500 No.11, verso; text, pp- 
                                     1-68. (Pp.66-7 are numbered  62-3). 

                                   Inlaid (to folio), average leaf 634 x 434 inches. Brown morocco, by Holloway. The Dillon (I, 1869, 
                                   Lot 488) — Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 3058) copy with Morrison  bookplate. 
                                   Inserted at front and inlaid are: 1. Engraved portrait of King James, by Wolf Kilian, half-length 
                                   to left, in hat and rising collar, oval in rectangular frame, four lines inscribed below. (This is a 
                                   copy in reverse of earlier engraving). 2. Engraved title of Thomas Scott’s The second part of Vox 
                                   Populi 1624, Goricum,  by Ashuerus  Janss, showing full-length portrait of Gondomar,   etc. 3+ 
                                   Engraved  portrait of Raleigh, by Simon van  der Passe, half-length to right, with truncheon, 
                                   as     arms, etc. (Various states were used as frontispiece to Raleigh's History of the World 
                                   1617). 
                                   Hinged-in is a document dated 18th March  1606, under the royal sign-manual for provision of Sir 
                                   Richard  Wigmore  for attendance upon the person of King James, etc. One page, recto first leaf 
                                   of foolscap sheet folded once. 

[ 844 ]

Tue  haste of the Government   to get this official ‘apologia’ publishedf is perhaps the 
              reason that there are two  impressions of this edition, dated 1618, in all of which the 
              first three leaves of sheet A, sheets B-C, the outer forme of sheet D, sheet E, and the 
              first two leaves of sheet F are from the same setting. 
                 Copies of the present impressiont occur with several states of half-sheet I. In what is 
              probably  the earliest (here called Variant A) the pages are misnumbered   (61-4) and 
              the first line of p.66 (misnumbered 62) reads ‘Maiesties Iustice, and the rest, euidently 
              prooued’. In the other two states the line quoted above is transposed to the bottom of 
              p-65, but in one  (Variant  B) the page-numbers   in the inner forme  are correctedtt 
              while in the other (Variant C, e.g. the present) only those in the outer forme have been 
              altered. 
                 In the second impression,  so-called because as stated above it is largely from the 
              same  setting as the first, the text of pp.45-58 is condensed so that the half-sheet I is 
              omitted.  There are two  issues of that impression—in  one, usually placed first, p.57 
              begins ‘shall have’; in the other, it begins ‘being made’. 
                 Raleigh’s execution aroused considerable popular feeling§ and it was with the view 
              of justifying their action that this official account was issued by the Commissioners 
              appointed  to try him. Bacon has been regarded  as the sole author, but though he was, 
              by  reason of his membership  in the Council, certainly one of the authors he was not 
              the sole sponsor. In fact, according to a letter of Bacon’s, quoted by Sabin, it contains 
              ‘additions, which were very material’, penned by  James himself. 

                  tAccording to a letter of Sir Robert Naunton’s (Forlesque Papers Camden Soc. N.S. (1871) I, 67,27 Novem- 
                    ber 1618) ‘in theyr haste, [the printers] were faine to watche 2 nights and sett 20 presses aworke at once’. 
                  }There is said to be another issue of the present impression which we have not seen, In it the first and last 
                    half-sheets are from another  setting. The imprint reads: ‘. . . deputie Printers for | the Kings most 
                    Excellent Maiestie. |...   ’, and the pages in I? are correctly numbered. As  the first half-sheet in the 
                    second impression  is from the setting used in the present, the ‘deputie Printers’ setting, if it exists (Sabin 
                    No.67549), is probably earlier than this. 
                  ttThe only  reason for placing this state before C is that it was the custom to print the inner forme first. 
                  §A Dutch  translation was published ‘Ins’ Graven-Hage,  By  Aert Meuris, 1619.’ 

                $.T.C. 20653.  Huntineron   C.L., 16,  Sabin XVI   No.67548,  Brusurrexp   Raleigh Bibl. No. 
                187.