29 

BACON, Sir FRANCIS, VISCOUNT ST. ALBANS. 
THE | ESSAIES | OF S' FRANCIS | BACON Knight, the | Kings 
Aturney (sic] Ge- | nerall. | { His Religious Medi- | tations. | J Places of 
Perfwafion | and Diffwafion. | Seene and allowed. | [block of type-orna- 
ment] | Printed at London [by John Beale] for John Iag- | gard, dwelling 
at the Hand and Starre | betweene the two Temple | Gates. 1613. | [in 
border of type-ornament] 

EIGHTH EDITION. Octavo. 

Coxzation: A8 (the first, probably blank, lacking); B-O8; P* (the last, probably blank, lacking); 
114 leaves present. 

Contents: title, recto [A2]; verso blank; dedi- text, recto K3—recto [M6]; title to Of the 
cation to Sir John Constable, in italic, signed colours of Good and Euill, a Fragment, 1613, 
‘FRA. BACON.’, Sig A3; The Table, in italic, verso [M6]; blank, recto [M7]; contents, Latin 
Sig Aq; text, recto [As]—verso K; contents of _ in italic, verso [M7]—recto [M8]; text, verso 
Meditationes, in italic, recto K2; verso blank; [M8]—verso [P3]. 

Olive morocco, extra, by Riviere. 434 x 234 inches. The Jones (1, 1918, Lot 62) copy with label. 

Ture are three distinct editions all bearing Jaggard’s imprint and dated 1613 which 
may be distinguished by the spelling of the word ‘Attorney’ on their titles: ‘Atturny’, 
‘Aturney’ (present copy), or ‘Atturney’, 
Dr. Pollard set forth the interesting theory, see Library IV (1923) 7-8, that the order 
of these editions might be determined by their spellings which, on the assumption that 
Bacon’s would be ‘/ess archaic—more modern—than that of the printers’, he would 
arrange as here listed. Curiously, despite the fact that his theory is supported by no 

[ 34 ]

evidence and might easily be vitiated by such extraneous circumstances as that the 
printer’s copy was one or more degrees removed from Bacon’s holograph, or the com- 
positors were exceptional converts to spelling reform, that order is supported by rather 
conclusive evidence which has not apparently been adduced. Jaggard in publishing 
the first of these editions did not employ either a manuscript or a copy of his own 1612 
edition but quite obviously used Beale’s 1612 edition and an examination of the three 
1613 editions shows that the ‘Atturny’ edition, though having the most modern orthog- 
raphy, is the nearest to Beale’s of them allt. 
It has been customary to regard the editions of the Essays which bear Jaggard’s 
imprint as pirated by him, but there is no evidence whatever to support such a view 
except the argumentum ab silentio that Jaggard made no entry for the book in the 
Stationers’ Register. There is reason for believing, on the contrary, that despite his 
unsavory reputation Jaggard possessed some rights in this book. This is substantiated 
by the fact that the Essayes were regularly entered to Hooper and to Beale who might 
easily have taken action against Jaggard if he had openly violated their copyrights, 
and yet, despite that fact, Jaggard made no attempt to conceal his connection with 
these editions, as his brother did in his Shakespeare piracies, by issuing them under 
false imprints. Furthermore, though Jaggard himself never made entry for the book, 
his widow transferred ‘her estate’ in the copy, 24th February 1626 (Arber IV. 151). In 
some manner, therefore, Jaggard must have secured ‘rights’ which the Stationers’ 
Company regarded as transferable even though not previously entered in the Register. 
But even if that were proved one must still account for the existence of three editions 
supposedly published by Jaggard, all dated 1613, but no succeeding editions, except 
Hart’s 1614 Edinburgh piracy, until 1624. This, by itself, might be attributed to bad 
judgment upon the part of Jaggard, since the editions before 1613 or after 1624 
appeared at regularly spaced intervals or at ones otherwise accountable, were it not 
that the three editions dated 1613 are all obviously designed to appear, at any rate so 
far as their titles are concerned, identical (see facsimiles in Quaritch Cat. 369). Such 
similarity of form might conceivably have been fortuitous, but that seems improbable. 
An examination of the books themselves serves only to complicate the problem for 
there can be no doubt whatsoever that, while the edition we have put first (‘Atturny’) 
was printed by William Jaggard for his brother John, the two other editions were both 
printed by John Beale!{ If Beale printed these editions under some arrangement 

{The normal rule of progressive modernization of reprints, except for the relationship with Beale’s edition, 
would reverse this order so that the ‘Atturney’ edition would be placed first, for whereas the ‘Atturney’ 
and ‘Aturney’ editions are close reprints, if a modernization appears in the ‘Aturney’ edition it is almost 
always to be found also in the ‘Atturny’ edition, etc. 
tHad all three been printed by William Jaggard one might have conjectured that Jaggard had made an 
arrangement with Beale whereby he was to be allowed to print one edition after the two, his own and 
Beale’s, 1612 editions were sold. Instead, however, of publishing only one, the simplest hypothesis would 
suggest that he proceeded to have three printed, one after the other, at intervals from 1613 to say about 
1620, all with similar titles in order to conceal from Beale that the one edition stipulated had long ago 

been disposed of: 
VOL.I [ 35 ]

made with Jaggard at the time Beale surrendered his rights in this bookif, a not 
uncommon practice, there would be no reason for issuing all three editions with titles 
obviously intended to appear identical. One is forced, therefore, to conclude that the 
two 1613 editions, including the present, printed by Beale are counterfeits, for their 
text is taken from Jaggard’s 1613 edition and not, as that edition was, from Beale’s 
own 1612. 

tfIn 1639, Beale printed and published an edition of the Essays under his own name. His right to the title 
was disputed and his press taken down, the edition confiscated, and, despite powerful outside interference, 
he was forced to make submission (see Trans. XV (1934) 371) 

S.T.C. 1143. Huntincron C.L., 17.