HARTLIB,   Samvet to John Evelyn’. 
                        A.L.S. 
                        3 OCTOBER 1660 
                        [Lonvon ?] 

                MS.35P 

                                 Description: Paper, two leaves, quarto, pp.2-3 blank, with seal. 
                                 PRovENANcE: William Upcott (1846, Lot 421) — Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2702). 

                                Appress, p.4: For his very worthy and ever honoured Friend. John Evelyn, Efqr. to 
                                bee left with M" Sanders at the Hawke and Pheafant on Ludgate-hill. with care and 
                                fpeed I pray. 

                                Transcript:  Much  Honoured  fir I hope you have received my laft wherin there was 
                                from  Paris an exact account concerning the Monfieur (Lacan®) and of his Chryftal- 
                                Vndertakings. In the laft of M* Beale? his refpects are prefented in thefe words.— And 
                                I fhall never forget M" Evelyne. If I find ought worthy his argument and knowledge 
                                I fhal arrogate the boldneffe to write to Him I can not promife that you fhal heare any 
                                more from mee as in this countrey. Affoone as I am fetled I fhal give you notice where[.] 
                                Thus  for that Worthy Man. I had many  other th[ing]s to adde but I am overwhelmed 
                                with preffing ftraites and diftractions in fo much that if kindnes of Friends doe not 
                                fpeedily affift mee will proove almoft vnfupportable. The Particulars are too many to 
                                relate but at our next meeting I can confide them into y* breaft. Only give mee leave 
                                to have recourfe to your Goodnes as to pleafure mee with the loane of five pound till 
                                the next Seffion of Parl. when my Cafe and condition is to bee prefented to that High 
                                and Honourable  Affembly*. Sir I can affure you as this your Chriftian Kindnes will 
                                come very feafonable fo it will oblige mee in a fpecial manner to fubfcribe myfelfe ever 
                                           Much  Honoured  Sir 
                                             Your really thankful and moft faithfully devoted Servant. 
                                               S.Hartlib. 

                               Enporsep,  by Evelyn, p.4: From M:  Hartlib: 3: octob: 1660 

                                   Notes: 1 Several letters from the correspondence between Hartlib and Evelyn are preserved 
                                       in B.M. Addit.MS.15948. 

                                                         [ 1234 ]

2 Not  identified. 

                   3 John  Beale, D.D. (1603-16832), who  in 1660 became rector of Yeovil in Somerset, whence 
                     he removed  from  Hertfordshire.                                               . 
                   4 In 1660,  Hartlib’s fortunes were evidently at a low ebb. His pension, granted to him by 
                     Parliament  in 1646, although nearly £700 in arrears, was cut off by the Parliament which 
                     met  after the Restoration. Hartlib petitioned that Parliament for relief but was unsuccess- 
                     ful, see his petition and letter to Lord Herbert in Censura Literaria VII, 1815, pp.201-7.