App.7 

JOYNER, Rosert (fl. 1598). 
ITIS, | OR THREE SEVE- | rall Boxes of fporting | Familiars. | ELO- 
GIVM. | True honeft mirthe vfed with fobrietie, | Can be offenfiue to no 
focietie: | Thereof in this booke thou haft varietie, | So that thou maift 
reade without fatietie. | [rule] | Semper ego auditor tantum ? nunquamne 
repona ? | Shall I {tand thrumming of caps all the daye? | Shall I not as 
other take leaue to playe. | [ornament, fabulous beasts entwined] | AT 
LONDON, | Printed by Thomas Iudfon, for | John Browne, and Iohn 
Harber}, and are | to be fould at the figne of the paper | booke in Chaun- 
cerie | lane. 1598. | 

  

  

First EDITION. Octavo. 

Coation: A(the first, probably blank, lacking)-F8(the last two, probably blank, lacking); 
45 leaves present. (Sig E3 is signed ‘B3’). 

{John Herbert or Harbert’s name is not known to occur on any other title and his address, at ‘the paper 
booke in Chauncerie lane’, was not known until the discovery of this volume. That this address is Herbert’s 
and not Browne’s may be accepted as probable for Voyon’s Discourse upon the catalogue of Doctors of 
Gods Church 1598, which Browne entered three weeks before the present, gives his address: ‘in Fleet- 
streete over against the white Friars, at the signe of the sugarloafe’. 

[ xx1x ]

Contents: title, recto [A2]; verso blank; dedi- verso [A6]; text, in three ‘Boxes’, recto [A7]- 
cation to Master Anthony Carpenter, signed _ verso [F6]. (Row of type-ornament at top and 
‘Robert Ioyner.’, recto A3-verso A4; The Author bottom of each page, running headlines above 
to his Itis, in italic, recto [As]-recto[A6]; blank, top row). 

Unbound, removed from eighteenth or early nineteenth century calf. 574 x 354 inches. Formerly 
bound with first edition of Epigrammes and Elegies of Sir John Davies and Christopher Marlowe. 
From the Dalrymple Library at Newhailes, Musselburgh (1937, Lot 212). 

Except for its entry in the Stationers’ Register, this little volume of epigrams was 
unknown until its appearance in the Dalrymple sale at Sotheby’s. Nothing is known 
of the authort nor of the 
Three Boxes more, (if these three Boxes speede) 
Of familiar earewigs thy neast may breede. 
which are mentioned in ‘The Author to his Itis’. 
That this unique volume was issued before the interdiction of the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, 1 June 1599, ‘That noe Satyres or Epigrams be printed hereafter’ (Arber 
III. 677) makes its recovery of considerable importance because it illustrates further 
the causes of that remarkable holocaust. Joyner appears to have been aware of the 
growing resentment against satirical epigrams for, although he wrote six months before 
the condemnation (the Jtis was entered 13 November 1598, Arber III. 131), he chose 
not to call his epigrams by that name: 
To speake troth, thy Familiars are nipping grams. 
Yet doe thou conceale, that they be Epigrams. . . . 
When a trade is bad, giue it a new name, 
And with credit, then one may vse the same. 
Epigrams as obscene vearse each one hates, 
Say then thy vearses are familiar mates. 
Indeede they are gnats, fleas, flies disguised, 
But to whome thou tell that, be aduised.tt 
In his Epistle Dedicatorie, the author says of these ‘familiar Items. All which being 
three times fortie, I haue closed vp in three boxes, and to [sic] send them vnto you 
(frienly good Sir) that at idle spurt if you like sporte, you might (& I pray that you 
would) looke them ouer, but not ouer-loooke them. If you respect their vnripenes 
farre from perfection they are but as Jtys, a greene plouer§: if [sic] their shape forme, 
matter, manner, conditions, they are but 3. seueral boxes of sporting familiars: I say 
three, yet not at ods one with another [;] seuerall: yet not vnioyned or vnioynted [;] 
boxes, yet not peace breakers, sporting yet not wantons, familiars, yet not bug-beares, 

}The only person of the name of Robert Joyner whom we have traced at this period is he of Pembroke 

College Oxford who succeeded William Cartwright in the Succentorship of Salisbury, cf. Bliss-Wood 
Fasti II, 36. 

HThe Author to his Itis, verso [As]. 
§Joyner’s recollection of Ovid was apparently not very accurate. Itys was the son of Tereus and Progne. 
He was killed by his mother and served up to his father for food; whereupon he was changed into a 
pheasant, Metamorphosis VI, 652 ff. However, ‘plouer’ is an old cant term for a ‘dupe’. 

[ xxx ]

& such familiars, as euery one naked, but none a gastly sprite: euery one vnkempt, 
but none a ranke slouen: euery one well tayledta, but none a very beast. It [sic] do 
owe you many od courtesies, therefore they are three: I doe pay them by peece-meale,

therefore they are seueral: I cannot in earnest make you full satisfactid, therfore they 
are sporting: I keepe all in minde, therefore they are boxes: I presume on your patience 
for a further day, therefore they are familiar’. 
Each of the epigrams, or ‘familiars’ as they are headed, is addressed to some person 

taThis probably refers to the couplet, printed in italic, appended as a moral to each of the 120 epigrams. 

[ xxxr ]

with a Latin, frequently punning, name. They are numbered in three series, or Boxes, 
and vary in length from four lines to fifty. They are mostly concerned with the unfaith- 
fulness of women or their tendency to become scolds, the folly of spendthrifts, or 
gluttony in its various forms. They contain, apparently, very few topical allusions 
although one of them, Boxe I, 8, is a long and rather obscure epigram on Harington’s 
Metamorphosis of Ajax 1596, while Boxe I, 19 may refer to a contemporary poetaster: 
A FAMIL. FOR CORVETTO. 
Corvetto much with Holinshed did rage, 
That chronacling the writers of his age, 
When roome enough was left him in the page, 
He did forget to place among the rest 
A famous learned writer of the West: 
And who was that? Corvetto? No I iest: 
Corvetto wrote but once a singing note, 
What though? should such a writer be forgote? 
Since he had once in Ballad royall wrote. 
For Stanyhurst hath chronicled therefore, 
One Dormer: so should Holinshed no more 
Haue done, then one (he knew) had done before. 
O on our manners, and 6 on our time? 
Must he be made writer, that made but a rime? 
As a fair example of Joyner’s shorter epigrams, Boxe III, 7 may be cited: 
A FAMIL. FOR MERCHAT. 
There is no good trusting Merchat in neede, 
Though it be true, that his worde is his deede. 
When he hath said, he hath done, and thats all, 
He that hath his worde, hath his deede withall. 
A knaue he is, whose worde and deed be one, 
If his worde be all, and his deede be none.