MS.142 

          HALL,  Josepu, Bishop of Exeter (1574-1656) to Sir Henry Spelman. 
          A.L.S. 
          21 SEPTEMBER  [1628] 
          EXETER 

                 Description:   Paper,  two  leaves, folio, pp.2-3 blank, trace of seal. 

               Provenance:   Alfred  Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2814). 

         VOLT                     [ 1263 ]

Appress, p.4: To my much honored frend S* Henry Spellman Knight! these 

                              Transcrit:   Noble S* wt my  best services         I haue long honored yor worth, 
                              though  personally vnacquainted; and now I haue  taken the boldnes to solicit y" in 
                              a businesse much concerning mee. In July last I attended his MatY at The baths, & 
                              gaue him satiffacc6n in that accusaén [sic]®, w° was cast vpon mee for extortid of fees; 
                              I then found that in that Schedule we was drawne out of the book, (the particulars 
                              wherof  it pleased his Ma‘Y to impart vnto mee) I was greatly wronged;  returning 
                              I charged the clarks; One of them sweares he neuer swore to that purpose that he is 
                              there in that fcroll reported to haue Done; My humble suit is that it will please you 
                              to vouchfaue mee so much fauor as that I may receiue a tranfcript? of the Deposicons 
                              against mee, that I may find where my  wrong  lyes. In hope of w° curtefy wt what 
                              conveinent speed may  be I take leaue & figne my selfe 
                                                              Yor much  Deuoted  Frend 
                                                                Jos: Exon: 
                              Exo  palace 
                              Sept. 21. 

                                  Nores:  1 This letter was probably addressed to Sir Henry Spelman because he was, 28 June 1627, 
                                       appointed a member  of a commission  to inquire what offices existed, and what fees were 
                                       taken in 11 Elizabeth, 1569-1570, and what fees had been imposed since. 
                                     2 Hall was consecrated to the see of Exeter, 23 December 1627. Archbishop Laud  suspected 
                                       that he had puritanical leanings and arranged to have him spied upon. The spies evidently 
                                       made life for Hall quite unendurable. He says: ‘I was three several times on my knees to 
                                       his majesty to answer these great criminations’ and he was not entirely freed from them 
                                       until he boldly threatened to resign if they did not cease. 
                                     3 A copy of the information Hall desired Spelman to obtain for him accompanies this letter 
                                       on a folio sheet, endorsed on verso ‘y® Bishop of Exon’, It is folded and numbered on first 
                                       Page ‘252’ and on third page ‘253’.