MS.105F 

                         PEPYS,  Samvex  to Dr. Arthur Charlett.! 
                         A.L. (copy) 
                         22 OCTOBER 1700 
                         CLAPHAM 

                                      Description:  Paper, folio, 2 leaves, p.4 blank except for endorsement. 

                                  PROVENANCE:  See preceding MS. 

                                 TRANSCRIPT: 
                                 [‘To D! Charlett’, added by another hand] 
                                 Reuerand  S" As impafient as I am to be amoung  my  old frinds againe (as you know 
                                who  cald them) my  bookes; my frinds on this fide ¥ water are obftinatly bent to pre- 
                                 uent it, as long as there is one mouthfull of fereine ayre to be hoped for this feafion; & 
                                 therefor to render my ftay in it the lefse burthenfom to me, haue put me upon feuerall 
                                litle excurfions of laite into the naibourhoud, that muft excufe my noe fooner acknol- 
                                 edging (as I now  moft thankfully doe) & anfwering,  your too  kind letter of the 6 

                                                                          Tuesday  Clapham  Oct>t 22 1700 

[ 810 ]

inftant & a laeter of the 15? be affured, that I wont be 3 days in towne (& that at 
           furthift cant now be to days off) before I fall to work with S* Godfrey Kneller, with 
           the matiearall [sic] you haue giuen me, to procure his Compleancce [sic] with what.wee 
           are to afk of him;  the ftate of my owne prefent health makeing me  as folifitous to 
           fecure to my felfe the honour of doeing it, as that of my reuerand & learned frind the 
           Docters makes  it unfitt, with refpect to his fatisfaction (fince he is pleafd to take it 
           foe) to yours, & to the Uniuerfitys, that any time fhoud be loft in the haueing it done. 
           And  a moft wellcom pleafuer it woud be to me to think, that what I doe hearein coud 
           paff for the leaft inftance of that uenerafion, which I fhoud be glad to haue opertunityes 
           of fhewing greater markes of, towards him. Nor fhoud this (as you know) haue been 
           to doe now, had  not the hopes you & I had entertaind of tempting him fom  time or 
           other down by  water to York ftayers, kept me under an expectafion (by your fauiour) 
           of getting it done heare. Nor woud I dispare of what you haue  in wifh, & and [sic] 
           perhapps  in uew, about King  Alfrade from D* Ratlife; but I haue a word to fay to 
           you firft upon it, if you woud imploy me to him in it*. 
             I haue not yett feene your book of uerfiefs, & foe can make noe prefent returne upon 
           your Complement   therein to our 2 painters®. 
             I know  not which of your mifreckonings to find fault with moft that of our learned 
           D®,  in plafeing me on foe neare a leuell in any refpect with our laite greate Chanfeler 
           ¥ Lord Somers  (the firft Mefineas of the age)° or yours, in thinking me a fitt man to be 
           afked queftians upon any thing that has paft ¥ thought of the moft learned profeffer & 
           my  moft honourd  frind D' Gregory’. Neuer the Leff, leaueing the formers to be an- 
           fwerd-for a moung the uenerable frailtys of his age & goodnefs of natuer, I fhall not be 
           foe fquemifh or remifs in ¥ later, as not to take a nother poft (haueing a litle forine- 
           work extroardnery  for this) to fee wheather it be pofible, for any one ufefull thought to 
           Occurr to me, that coud efcape D? Gregory, upon a fubiect foe noble, & of which he is 
           foe abfolute a Mafter. 
                                         I am ever Deare f* your 
                                           Obliged & obedient feruant 
                                                        [Unsigned] 

           EnporseED, p.4: Oct” ¥ 22 1700 S P to Dt Charlett 

            Nores:  1 The original, of which this is merely a copy, is preserved among Dr. Charlett’s papers 
                 in the Ballard MSS. in the Bodleian. It has been printed, with the date 29 October, by C.E. 
                 Doble in the Academy,  6 September  1890, p.200, and by R.G.Howarth   in Letters and the 
                 second diary of Samuel Pepys, pp-316-7- 
               2 These letters are printed by Howarth op. cit. pp.311 and 315. 
               3 Pepys proposed to present a picture of Dr. John Wallis to the University of Oxford. Regard- 
                 ing this episode see Bodleian Quarterly Record VII, pp.286-290. 
               4 Dr. Charlett in his letter of 6 October mentions a hope that if Kneller comes to Oxford he 
                 may  be persuaded  to paint and present a picture of King Alfred, the founder, to Christ 
                 Church  College. 

        VOL.III                          { 811 J

5 In his letter of 6 October, Charlett wrote ‘A book of verses is ordered for you’, and in that 
                                      of 15 October he wrote ‘I hope you have taken notice in our Book of Verses of the compli- 
                                      ment to Signor Varrio [Antonio Verrio] and Sir Godfry Kneller in the same page’. The book 

                                       has not been identified.                                  .        : 
                                     6 Dr. Wallis on hearing of Pepys’s project with regard  to his portrait had compared   his 

                                     benefactor to Lord Somers.                                           / 
                                    7 With his letter of 15 October Charlett enclosed a “Scheme of Mathematicks proposed to 

                                      be taught at Oxford’ of Dr. David Gregory of which, as he here promises, Pepys sent a long 
                                      criticism under date 5 November 1700 (Howarth op. cit. pp.317-321).