VOL.II [575]

560 JONSON, Benjamin, 

  

THE | VVORKES | OF | BENY4MIN JONSON. | [rule] | The fecond 
Volume. | [rule] | CONTAINING | THESE PLAYES, | Viz. | 1 Bar- 
tholomew Fayre. | 2 The Staple of Newes. | 3 The Divell is an Affe. | 
[printers’ device, McK.n.339, in box-rules] | LONDON. | Printed} for 
RICHARD MEIGHEN, | 1640. | [in double-rule border] 

  

First collected edition. Volume II edited by Jonson, Volume [III] by Digby. Folio in fours. 

Turse two volumes divide into four sections having separate signature sequences and 
separate paginations. The last three, though now variously arranged in binding, were 
originally issued together so that, except bibliographically, they form one volume, how- 
ever for convenience each part is here separately described. 

[Vouume IJ, ie. Part I: Bartholomew Fayre, Divell is an Asse, Staple of Newes] 

Conation: A®; B-Y*; Aa-Cc4; D-H#; 19; 128 leaves. (Sig Cc3 is signed C3). 

Cowrenrs: general-title, recto [A]; verso blank; 
title to Bartholomew Fayre, imprint, LON- 
DON, | Printed by 1.8. for ROBERT ALLOT, 
and are | to be fold at the figne of the Beare, 
in Pauls | Church-yard. 1631. |, recto [Aa]; 
verso blank; The Prologue to the Kings Mai- 
esty, recto Ag; the Persons, verso; Induction, 

Divell is an Asse, imprint as in BF, p{gt]s 
blank, p.[g2]; The Persons, p.93; Prologue, in 
italic, p.g4s text, pp.95-170; title to Staple of 
Newes, imprint as in B.F., p.[1]; The Persons, 
p.2; text, pp.3-[76]. (B.12 is numbered 6, 13 is 
3s 31 i8 13, 99 is 97, 132 is 124, 137 is 129, 19 
(repeated) is 9, 22 is 16, 63 is 36). 

  

  

recto [Ag]-verso [A6]; text, pp.1-885 title to 

Bound uniformly with the 1616 Workes. 1134 x 734 inches. The several parts have been arranged 
haphazardly by the binder. 

Tue three plays of Volume II were all that Jonson saw through the press of a projected 
continuation of his 1616 volume. His failure to complete the collection was probably 
due to the damning by the town of The New Inn which was published 1631, the same 
year as this volume. Because of Jonson’s supervision of this part, the text here given 
may be considered authoritative. 
As first printed Sig [A] was a blank, there being no general-titlet. In 1640, a number 
of these 1631 plays still remaining unsold, sheet [Ar and 6] was again passed through 

{General-title, by Bernard Alsop and Thomas Fawcett for Richard Meighen; Part I, by J[ohn. Bleale). for 
Robert Allot, 1631; Parts II-IV, [by Bernard Alsop and Thomas Fawcett for Thomas Walkley], 1640-1. 
Copies in that state are in the Huntington (Hoe), in the possession of Dr.W.W.Greg (see Oxford Biblio- 
graphical Society Trans. I, 259), at the Rosenbach Company (Bridgewater-Huntington-White), and 
another— presented by Digby to Elizabeth of Bohemia—listed in Dobell Cat.84 (1929) No.177. This last 
has a general-title supplied by Mr. Dobell. 

[ 576]

the press, this time of Bernard Alsop and Thomas Fawcett, and the general-title, tran- 
scribed above, printed on recto [A]. This title refers only to the three plays printed in 
1631 and describes them as ‘The fecond Volume’. However, bound with these three 
1631 plays are normally found the three parts containing the masques, plays and 
miscellany dated 1640 (or 1641) which have no general-title nor any other preliminary 
matter. 
‘The fact that over a period of years the 1631 plays may have been sold as a supple- 
mentary volume to the 1616 Workes (the Huth-Chew-W.A.Clark large-paper copy is 
an example) would easily account for their being described as the second volume quite 
aside from the explicit statement of the 1640 general-title. 
It is a matter of record that Parts I-IV were known as ‘The Third Volume’ for 
Moseley in the preface to his edition of Suckling’s Remains 1659 states that The Sad 
Shepherd is ‘extant in his [Jonson’s] Third Volume’, and in 1658 when Walkley entered 
the rights to Parts IT-IV (Eyre Il, 196) the copy is entitled “Ben Johnsons workes ye 
grd vol. . =’. 
External evidence which has only recently come to light in the form of a Chancery 
Bill (transcribed by Mr. Frank Marcham Trans. XI, 1930, p.2a5, and discussed by 
Dr.W.W.Greg op. cit. pp.461-5) affords at least a starting point for conjecture con- 
cerning the peculiar features of this book. The newly discovered document is a petition, 
dated 20 January 1640-1, made for Thomas Walkley, the publisher, to Sir Edward 
Littleton, Lord Keeper. In it Walkley alleges that before his death Jonson delivered 
true and perfect copies of his several writings and works not before printed to Sir 
Kenelm Digby to whose care and trust he left the publishing and printing. In pursu- 
ance of this trust, after Jonson’s death, Digby turned these manuscripts over to 
Walkley for publication. Walkley obtained license for their publication and arranged 
for the printing. Meanwhile John Benson and Andrew Crooke secured unauthorized 
manuscripts of some of Jonson’s works and entered them at Stationers’ Hall. Hearing 
of this Walkley obtained a warrant prohibiting Benson and Crooke from further print- 
ing or publishing these works. His triumph was short-lived for another publisher, John 
Parkertt, with the connivance of Benson and Crooke, attached at the printer's the 
sheets of Walkley’s edition, by judgment at Guildhall, upon the grounds that Benson 
and Crooke owned the copyright and that Benson was in debt to him, the said Parker. 
For the redress of this injury Walkley complains. 
Walkley’s story, unless corroborated by independent evidence, would of course have 
little value. It happens, however, that in general it can be substantiated, and if credible 
it serves to make clear several matters hitherto obscure which were not directly involved 
in these lawsuits, Taking his assertions in the order narrated above, it appears that, 
firstly, as regards the connection of Digby with this publication, there is other con- 
temporary authority, for Moseley who later owned the copyright in this work, in the 
preface cited above, states that Digby was responsible for publication of part of this 

tile may be worthy of note that Parker leftin his will a gold ring to Andrew Crooke, and that in 164 Parker 
became a Warden of the Stationers’ Company. 

VOL.IT [577]

1640 volume§. Secondly, regarding the ‘corrupt’ and unauthorized 
by Benson there is evidence extant in the texts of his editions of Q.Horatius Flaccus: 
his Art of Poetry (q.v.] and Execration (q.v.]. Thirdly, as to the entries for books by 
Jonson made by Benson and Crooke prior to the date of this petition Arber’s Tran- 
script provides evidence which supports Walkley’s story. According to Walkley, it was 
not until his edition was partly printed that Benson and Crooke made their entries. 
‘An examination of the Registers shows that during the period thus prescribed Benson 
entered and published the ‘Execration with other his smaller epigrams’ (16 December 
1639); the Art of Poetry (8 February 1640); and the Masque of the Gypsies (20 February 
1640)fa; while Crooke (in partnership with Sergier) entered the masques of Augurs, 
Time Vindicated, Neptune’s Triumph, Pann's Anniversary and ‘sundry Elegies & other 
Poems’ (20 March 1640). 
Thus, when checked by the available external evidence, Walkley’s story can be 
corroborated and from it we learn for the first time of the extent of the connection of 
both Walkley and Crooke with the publication of this work. It is true that Walkley’s 
interest might have been inferred from his entry of 17 September 1658ta, as might 
Crooke’s from the fact that in 1637 he had procured a transfer of the rights to Bar- 
tholomew Fayre and the Staple of Newes from the estate of Robert Allottta and thus, 
from his ownership of the rights to the masques previously noted, held considerable 
rights in Jonson’s works. But such entries unless supported by evidence of continued 
ownership must always be contingent upon possible unregistered private transfer. 
Crooke’s name appears as agent on the title of the second edition of Volume I 
(1640) of Jonson’s works, but until the discovery of this Bill the only link associating 
Benson with Crooke in the publication of Jonson’s collected works was the fact that 
the plate of Vaughan’s portrait of Jonson was used in books with which their names were 
individually connected, see Execration. Now, with the evidence to be derived from 
Walkley’s complaint, there can be no doubt that Crooke in 1640 still retained his 
copyright in the two plays, a fact which is of particular significance for from it may 
be deduced a fairly plausible explanation of the puzzling format of this volume. 
To begin with, the three plays dated 1631, all purport to be printed by ‘Jfohn]. 
Bleale]. for Robert Allot’ and so, from the typographical evidence, they undoubtedly 
were. The three parts bound after the 1631 plays were anonymously printed but the 
ornaments used were at that time in the possession of Bernard Alsop and Thomas 
Fawcett who also, from the device McK.n.339, apparently printed the general-title§z. 
Then, continuing, we find that the second part, unlike all the others, begins with Sig B 
§Quoted in Greg Masques p.xv. Moreover, the presentation copy noted above is inscribed in Digby's well- 
known hand. 
aSee also entry under 4 November 1639. 
faEyre II, 196; transferred 20 November 1658, II, 206; retransferred IT, 381. 
HaThese rights may be traced in the Registers (Arber V.156, 260, 388). John Legate Jr. was a partner of 

Crooke’s in this last transaction but Crooke’s partners in this affair seem to have played an insignificant 
part. 

§aSayle (11 No.g221) suggests that perhaps John Haviland printed Part II, the Masques portion. 

{578 ]

so that one may suspect that at that point, at one time, it was intended to introduce 
preliminary matter. This is of interest from the fact that, as noted above, in the seven- 
teenth century the three 1631 plays were known as the second volume and the rest 
of the present volume [parts II-IV] was known, at least to the trade, as the third 
volume. In some copies, for reasons detailed below, The Divell is an Asse occurs in an 
entirely new setting (from the ornaments printed by Thomas Harper), with imprint: 
‘Imprinted at London 1641’. 
While it is difficult to determine how much is due to later sophistication and impos- 
sible to compute the comparative frequency of any given state, the various parts are 
now found, and apparently were originally issued, in the following combinations: (a) 
the 1631 plays alonetd; (b) the same with the 1640 general-title; (c) parts II-IV alone, 
without a general-title; (d) as the present, 1631 plays with the general-title and parts 
IL-IVi4; (e) as in ‘d’ but with the 1641 reprint of Divell is an Asse substituted for the 
original of 1631; and (f) as in ‘c’ with the 1641 reprint of D. is an A. 
The three 1631 plays bound separately without the general-title (a) were probably 
issued in that form by Robert Allot to purchasers who already owned the 1616 Workes; 
whereas, the (b) copies which are separately bound but preceded by the 1640 general- 
title are probably part of a remainder stock which Richard Meighen apparently acquired 
from Allot’s heirs about the time Crooke obtained the copyrights to two of these 1631 
playst{s. The general-title was probably added by Meighen when Walkley’s third 
volume was advertised in the trade, though it is not unlikely that he sold some copies 
before adding the general-title. 
Copies (c) of parts II-1V (Walkley's third volume) separately bound without any 
general-title are very uncommon but whether because they have been considered 
incomplete and so discarded, or because comparatively few copies were so issued cannot 
be determined. According to Walkley’s testimony this was the condition, ‘printed and 
ready for to be published’, of his edition of Jonson’s works when it was attached by 
Parker. It is not unlikely that the reason no prefatory matter had been prepared was 
that Digby, though overwhelmed with his intrigues and other affairs of state (see 
D.N.B. XV, 62), had kept Walkley in daily expectation. 
Since lawsuits in the seventeenth century were even more interminable affairs than 
they are today, though the actual records are not available, Walkley probably was 
deprived of his property for some time; at any rate, Dr. Greg has observed§é that the 

  

   

{eDr. Greg’s copy of this is bound with combination ‘c’ which may merely be the result of sophistication. 
$oThese complete copies frequently occur with Part III, containing the 1649 plays, bound immediately after 
the 1631 plays so that all the plays are together. The order of the 163 plays is also frequently that given 
on the general-title rather than the order in which according to their collation they were intended to be 
issued, These variations, however, may be entirely due to the initiative of the binders either early or late. 
$oThere is no evidence to prove this assertion except that otherwise there is no apparent explanation for 
Meighen’s connection with these plays for if the remainder stock had also been acquired by Crooke he 
would presumably have retailed it himself. Dr. Greg (Trans. XI (1931) 464) has suggested that perhaps 
Meighen was associated with Walkley in this enterprise but that is not likely since Walkley's volume was 
intended to have a separate title and preliminaries. 
§Masques p.xviii., 

VOL. [ 579 1

recto Sig Br of Part II is soiled in many copies as though the folded sheets had lain 
for some period unprotected in a warehouse. Eventually, however, Walkley must 
have obtained some sort of settlement which, though it may have forced him to share 
some of the stock with Crooke and Benson, left him in possession of the copyrightfc 
to the works he had printed. Probably in June 1640, when Crooke attemptedic to 
register The Divell is an Asse, Walkley discovered that that play had never been entered 
in the Stationers’ Register and that Crooke did not have the copyright to it although 
he did own the rights to the two other plays printed in 1631. Apparently Walkley was 
able to prevent Crooke from acquiring a clear title to the play for in 1641 Walkley 
hired Thomas Harper to reprint that play for him, and issued some copies (c) with 
his parts II-IVf{c and included the title in his belated entry in 1658. 
It is difficult to explain the reason for the substitution of the 1641 reprint of Divell 
is an Asse in some complete copies (e) for it is unlikely that the sheets of the 1631 
edition of that play gave out before the others§¢ since it was printed with signatures 
and pagination continuing those of Bartholomew Fayre. On the other hand, this com- 
bination cannot always have been the result of late sophistication because the Digby 
presentation copy in contemporary morocco, described by Dobell, is an example. 
From the fact that Walkley never prepared a general-title for his third volume it 
may perhaps be inferred that either he was deprived in the settlement of the lawsuit of 
a large portion of his stock or, in his disgust with the whole business, he sold most of 
the copies wholesale, possibly to Meighenfd or even to Crooke. Consequently, the 
ordinary complete copies (d), which certainly are the most common form in the hands 
of collectors today, may never have been bought retail from Walkley. 
‘There are large-paper copies of the 1631 plays. One, with blank [A], is the W.A.Clark 
(Huth-Chew copy) and one, with the general-title, is the Huntington (Griswold-Hoe). 

[Vonume III, Part I: Masques, Under-woods, Mortimer] 
Coutation: B-Q*; R?; S-X*; ¥?; Z-Oo#; Pp?; Qq4; 146 leaves. (Sig Bb2 is signed B2). 

Contents: Masques (headline), pp.t-159; LONDON, | [rule] | Printed M.DC.XL. | 
blank, p.[160]; title to Under-woods, imprint, [rule] |, p.{161]; To the Reader, in italic, signed 

teWalkley did not register his rights, however, until 1658—see footnote above. 
4eS.G.Dunn noted in 7.1.8. 28 July 1921, p.484, a copy of the 1631 D. is an 4. which has written at the 
bottom of p.170, ‘June 6, 1640, Let this be entered for Andrew Crooke but not printed till I give further 
directions. John Hansley.’. 
HtcCopies in this state are not frequently met with in libraries for they have usually been considered imper- 
fect, however, they occur now and then in the second-hand market. Two copies are recorded under $.7.C. 
No.147548. 
§eDr. Greg writes ‘Jonson is known to have distributed copies of these plays separately” and suggests that 
more of the D. is an A. were sent out than of the rest. In order to make reprinting worth while he would 
have had to have given a good many copies. 
fdThe 1641 reprint of the Dieell is an Asse was advertised for sale in 1656 by G.Bedell and Thomas Collins, 
the successors of Meighen (see Greg Masques p.xxxiv). 

[ 580 ]

‘BEN. IOHNSON.’, p.(162]; text, pp.163- 
[285]; blank, p.[286]; title to Mortimer his Fall, 

p-[288]; dramatis personae, p.(289]; Arguments, 
p-l2go]s text, pp.2gt-2. (P.285 is numbered 

imprint, Printed M.D.C.XL. |, p.[287]; blank, 

  

283). 

At the end of the text of Mortimer some copies read ‘Left unfinished’ while others, 
e.g. the present, read ‘Hee [Jonson] dy’d, and left it unfinifhed.’ As is explained in the 
note under the Part I, the fact that the text of this part begins with Sig B probably 
indicates that Walkley intended to place it first. Dr. Greg has pointed out that this 
conjecture is substantiated in that both the third and fourth parts contain titles 
dated 1641. 

[Vorume III, Part Il]: Magnetick Lady, Yale of a Tub, Sad Shepherd) 

Coztation: A-P4; Q®; R-V4; 78 leaves. 

  

Contents: title to Magnetick Lady, imprint, 
LONDON, | [rule] | Printed M.DC.XL. | 
frule] |, pt]; blank, p.l2]; The Persons, p.33 
blank, p.[4]; text, pp.s-64; title to Tale of a 
‘Tub, imprint as in M.L., p.[65]; blank, p.[66]; 
The Persons, p.67; Prologue, in italic, p.68; 
text, pp-69-79, 70-1135 blank, p.[rr4]; title to 

Sad Shepherd, imprint, LONDON, | [rule] | 
Printed M.DC.XLI. | [rule] |, p.[r1s]; blank, 
p-[116]; The Persons, p.117; The Argument, p. 
118; Prologue, pp.119-120; text, pp.121-122, 
133-1553 blank, p.[156]. (P.so is numbered 52, 
151 is 143, and 154 is 146). 

Ar the end of the text of the Tale of @ Tub some copies read ‘FINIS.’, while others, 

eg. the present, read ‘The end.’. 

[Vouume III, Part IV: Horace Art of Poetrie, English Grammar, Timber: or, Discoveries] 

  

Couation: A-K4; L?; M-R4; 66 leaves. 
: title to Horace, imprint, | Printed 
plz]; text, the Latin, in italic, on 
versos, English on rectos, pp.2-295 blank, p. 
[go]; title to English Grammar, imprint as in 
Horace, p.[31]; quotations, in italic, p.lj2ls 

  
  

occupy pp.34, 375 38; 41, 42 45, 46, 49, and 
50), pp.34-845 title to Timber, imprint, LON- 
DON, | [rule] | Printed M.DC.XLI. | [rule] |, 
p.85; Latin note regarding title, in italic, p.86; 
text, 87-132. 

Preface, p[gg]j text (Latin notes, in italic, 

Wien reprinted in the 1692 collected edition the English Grammar was considerably 
revised and altered to conform to the linguistic practices of the end of the seventeenth 
century. According to Watson (Litis Vives p.44), Jonson's Timber is lavishly purloined 
without acknowledgement from Vives’s short treatise on rhetoric, De Consultatione. 
The New Inne was probably not included in this collection because the copyright 
belonged to Thomas Alchorne. If Walkley’s statement, in the petition cited above, that 
this edition ig printed from ‘true and perfect copies’ prepared by Jonson himself is true, 
then this text is of greater authority than it has usually been considered. It can never, 

[ 581] 

VOL.

however, rival the 1616 volume for that had the benefit of numerous last minute cor- 
rections by the author. 
‘The only large-paper copy known of Volume III is the Griswold-Hoe-Huntington 
copy which measures 121}{¢ x 856 inches. 

S.T.C. 14754. Huntincton C.L., 239. Hor Car. III (1903) 15. W.A.CLark Car. I, 68; 
IV, 57. Wiener Car. I, 273. WRENN Car. III, 26. Greo Capel! Cat., 72.