SHAKESPEARE,     Wit. 
          THE  | Famous Hiftorie of | Troylus and Creffeid. | Excellently expreffing 
          the beginning | of their loues, with the conceited wooing | of Pandarus 

898 

             VOL.III                             [ 925 ]

Prince of Licia. | Written by William Shakefpeare. | [block of type-orna- 
                          ment] | LONDON  | Imprinted  by Gleorge]. E/d for Riichard]. Bonian and 
                          Hfenry]. Walley, and | are to be fold at the fpred Eagle in Paules | Church- 
                          yeard, ouer againft the | Great North doore. | 1609. | 

                                    First EDITION; second  issue. Quarto. 
                                    Coxtation:  J2(cancellans); A(the first cancelled)-L*; M1; 46 leaves. 

                                     Contents:    title, recto [{]]; verso blank; pref- (Headlines  on verso read  ‘The hiftory’, and on 
                                     ace, A neuer  writer, to an ever reader. Newes.,   recto ‘of Troylus and Creffeida.’). 
                                     in  italic, Sig 2;   text, recto  A2-verso   M. 

                                    Red  morocco,  Janseniste, by  Riviere. 7 x 53{6  inchesf. The title is partly in facsimile. The 
                                    Clawson  (II, 1926, Lot 714) copy  with bookplate. 

                               Tue  first issue is without the preface, and the title, recto [A], reads: ‘THE | Hiftorie of 
                               Troylus  | and Creffeida. | As it was acted by the Kings Maiefties | feruants at the Globe. | 
                               Written by William Shakefpeare. | [block of type-ornament] | [imprint as in cancel title, 
                               apparently  from same  setting]’, reproduced Pollard Folios and Quartos p.56. In the 
                               present that title-leaf is cancelled and the half-sheet, signed {], substituted. 
                                  In the second issue title, the statement that this play had been acted at the Globe 
                               is omitted and the author of the preface declares that it was ‘neuer stal’d with the Stage, 
                               neuer  clapper-clawd  with the palmes  of the  vulger’. Consequently  Shakespearean 
                               scholars have been considerably puzzled by the fact that there is some external evidence 
                               that before this edition was printed the play was known ‘and if known,  it must have 
                               been  performed’. It has been suggested that it was only acted at Court, or at an Inn 
                               of Court, and  that ‘this was not thought to amount to staling with the stage’ (Alex- 
                               ander, Trans. 1X,  1928, p.267). 
                                  The only other early Shakespeare quarto to be furnished with a preface is the 1622 
                                Othello (q.v.]. The present preface has been frequently quoted as authority for the 
                               price of quarto plays at that time, namely  a ‘testerne’, sixpence, while the singular 
                               prophecy  which it contains ‘that when hee is gone, and his Commedies out of sale, you 
                               will scramble for them, and set vp a new English Inquisition’ has been fulfilled if not 
                               exactly in the manner  the writer imagined. 
                                  The history of the copyright of this book is somewhat obscure. James Roberts first 
                               entered it, 7 February 1603, ‘to print when he hath gotten sufficient aucthority for yt.’ 
                                Roberts, apparently through his connections with the players by reason of his patent 
                               for play-bills, made several similar entries of plays. Whether these entries were intended 
                               as has been suggested, to forestall piracies or whether Roberts, who was a trade-printer 
                               and  not a publisher, merely speculated in the manuscripts which he was able through 

                                       +The uncut  Heber-Holford-Rosenbach   Co. copy of the first issue measures 82 x 6 inches or more than an 
                                         inch taller than the next tallest copy known. 

[ 926 ]

his connections to acquire, cannot be determined. In the Present instance, he appar- 
               ently did nothing about  it for some time. In 1606, Roberts sold his printing office to 
               William  Jaggard but  he did not apparently sell all his copyrights at that time. It is 
               therefore not unlikely that when, 28 January  1609, Bonian and  Walley entered this 
               play they were actually merely  registering a transfer of rights which they had legiti- 
               mately acquired  along with the unlicensed copy from Roberts. Perhaps the fact that 
               Roberts's entry was conditional while theirs was fully licensed was thought to be reason 
               enough for not noting the transfer. 
                 This quarto presents a ‘good’ text. Scholars are, of late years, inclining to the belief 
               that the Folio was set-up from a corrected copy of this edition. 
                 Of the first issue only four copies are known, viz. the British Museum (Steevens- 
               Roxburghe-George   III), Elizabethan Club (Daniel-Huth), Huntington  (Dyson-Pope- 
               Kemble-Devonshire),   and  the Heber-Holford  copy  now  owned  by  the Rosenbach 
               Company.   Of this second  issue we can trace nine other  copies, viz. the Bodleian 
               (Malone), British Museum   (Halliwell), Dyce, Eton (Storer), Folger (Locker-Church- 
              Huntington-Jones),   Harvard  (Perkins-White), Huntington  (Ives-Pope-Hoe), Trinity 
              College Cambridge   (Capell), and one in the Possession of the Crichton Stuart family. 

               S.T.C, 22332,  ARBER  III. 226; 400. HuwmiNcTON   C.L., 379. CLawsoN  Car., 262 (tp. facs.). 
               Cuurcn   Car.  II, 844. BaRtLerr   Mr.W.S.  No.4.   GREG  Capell Cat., 135. Locker   Car, 
               (1886) 108.  HurH  Car. IV, 1337.