MS. 1054 

                      PEPYSIANA—   KNELLER,  Sir Goprrey (1648-1723) to Samuel Pepys. 
                      A.L.S.* 

                        21 MARCH  1701/2 
                         [Lonpon] 

                                     Descarprion:  Paper, quarto,  2 leaves: p.1, Kneller letter; p.2, blank; p.3, holograph  copy  of 
                                     Pepys’s reply; p.4, endorsement. Gilt-edged writing paper. 

                               Provenance: When  and how this letter was removed from the Pepys muniments is not known. 
                               TRANSCRIPT:                                                      March.  21. 17034. 

                                                   ry felf the pleasiure of feeing you at Clapham. but what with 
                                                     affairs I coud not well know 2 days beuor how to apoint your 

                             S* I woud haue given m 
                             the bad whather, and my 

[ 812 ]

EnporseD,  p.4: March. 21. 17014. S' Godfry Kneller to SP. abt D! Wallis’s Picture. 
           With SP’s Answer  thereto March. 234 17014. 

           Transcript  of Pepys’s reply:                 Clapham.  Monday  Marth  23. 17034. 
           S! I have been in continued hopes of y® favour of Your promised Visit, or at leaft of 
           that of Df Charlett’s (whom I have not seen nor heard Syllable from, but by You thefe 
           6. Months) or You  had been sooner called-on from mee upon y® Subject of Yours of 
           Saturday laft. 
             The Truth  is, I am not a little furprised at y© maner of our learned Friend’s pro- 
           ceeding with me on that Occasion: and You shall soon know why. 
             In y meantime,  pray let y° Bearer my Servant bring me word when You heard last 
           from Oxford about it, & from whom,  & particularly whether from D! Charlett or no; 
           and if You please, forbear giving any Orders about y* Frame till You hear further. 
             I have not now  for some Years been  able to bear y® Stones of London, nor dare 
          flatter myselfe when I shall; or I should much rather by my Visits ease both You & 
           myselfe of this way of Supplying it; being moft truly S* 
                                   Yo! faithfull & most humble ferv! 
                                               S Pepys. 

            Nores:  1 This letter, together with Pepys’s answer, both here first printed, are missing from 
                 the correspondence  regarding Dr.  Wallis’s picture which Rachael Poole edited for the 
                 Bodleian Quarterly Record VUI, pp.286-290. Two letters which precede the present, one from 
                 Kneller to Pepys September 1701, and Pepys’s reply, are now lost. That they were sent and 
                 something of their contents may  be deduced from  Kneller’s letter to Pepys of 24 March 
                 1702 (Braybrooke  V, 1849, pp.401-2). 
                   We  know  from the diaries of Hearne and David Gregory that Kneller went to Oxford in 
                 September  1701 to paint Dr. Wallis’s portrait. Wallis wrote a letter of thanks to Pepys, 24 
                September,  which  Kneller delivered along with the lost note of his own which announced 
                that he had painted  the face and would proceed with the rest in due course. Pepys replied 
                 approving what  Kneller had done and  encouraged him  to finish the portrait. Apparently, 
                 Kneller took nearly six months to complete the task and then announced it to Pepys in the 
                present letter. Pepys was not enjoying very good health and had been irritated by Dr. Char- 
                lett’s continued silence. He therefore answered Kneller’s note with his of 23 March, tran- 
                scribed above, written in a captious spirit to which Kneller responded warmly  in his of 

               24 March. 

       VOL.II                     [ 813 ]

Pepys was, no doubt, pleased that he had kept this copy of his reply for he was shocked 
                                     by the vehemence of Kneller’s answer. He immediately sent a reply (op.cit. V, p.402) which 
                                     began: ‘For God’s sake (my old Friend) look once more  over my  letter of yesterday [i.e, 
                                     that quoted above] and tell me what  one word  there is in it that should  occasion one 
                                     syllable of what my man brings me this morning in answer to it . . . 
                                   2 The frame finally chosen was lacquered, not gilt. 
                                   3 Kneller’s orthography probably records his Liibeck origin. 

                      PEPYSIANA,    see MSS. 14, 414, 41¢ and 104¢.