275 

DEKKER, Tuo[mas]. 
THE | MAGNIFICENT | Entertainment: | Giuen to King James, Queene 
Anne his wife, | and Henry Frederick the Prince, vpon the day | of his 
Maiefties Tryumphant Paffage (from | the Tower) through his Honour- 
able Citie | (and Chamber) of London, being the | 15.0f March.1603. | 4s 
well by the Englifh as by the Strangers: VVith | The [peeches and Songes, 
deliuered in the feue- | rall Pageants. | Mart. Templa Deis, mores populis 
dedit, otia ferro, | Aftra fuis, Calo fydera, ferta Ioui. | Tho. Dekker. | 
[printer's device, McK.n.339] | Imprinted at London by T[homas]. C[reede]. 
[and others] for Tho[mas]. Man | the yonger. 1604. | 

First EDITION. Quarto. 
Coxtation: A(the first, probably blank, lacking)-I*; 35 leaves present. 
ConTenrs: title, recto [A2]; verso blank; text, recto A3-recto [I4]; errata, recto [14]; blank verso. 

Polished calf, extra, lettered lengthwise on spine, by Detmold (endpapers watermarked ‘186-’). 
6% x 5 inches. The John Duerdin (1884, Lot 195) —H.B.Forman (I, 1920, Lot 222) copy with 
bookplates. 

THERE are two other editions of this date which may be easily distinguished from the 
present by their imprints which read: ‘Imprinted at London by E.Allde for Tho. Man 
the yonger, 1604.’{, and ‘Edinburgh, Printed by Thomas Finlason and are to be sould 
at Niddries wynde heide. Anno.Dom.1604. with Licence.’. 
The edition which states that it is printed by Allde is no doubt the later of the two for 
not only are the errors listed in the present, recto [I4], corrected in that text and the 
errata list deleted; but it is a contracted reprint collating: A?, B-I*, even though, as 
stated on its title, it contains ‘those speeches that before were publish’t in Latin, now 
newly set forth in English’, viz. ‘The Italians speech in English’, 20 lines, and a trans- 
lation of the ‘Sermo ad Regem’, 52 lines, which are not included in the Creede edition 

{That title reads: ‘The whole magnifycent entertainment . . . ’. The S.T.C. 6511 edition printed by E.Allde 

for T.Man, presumably with title reading as in the present is a ghost; at least the copies listed in the $.T.C. 
do not exist. 

[ 268 ]

at allt. Moreover, it was the present title and not that used by Allde which was entered 
in the Stationers’ Register by Man. Nevertheless, the Allde edition contains nearly 
half the original setting of the type of the Creede editiontf. 
From typographical evidence it can be demonstrated that the present edition was 
divided among several shops§, as follows: sheets A-B, C-D, E, F-G, H, and I. From 
the ornaments, it can be seen that sheets A-B were printed by Creede; sheet H, by 
Lownes; and sheet I, at least as reimposed in the later edition, by Allde. The printers 
of sheets C-G cannot be identified but possibly some of them were the work of other 
compositors in the shops named. They contain no ornaments. 
If the number of booksta which the event called forth is a measure this entrance of 
King James was one of the most ‘magnificent’ of all the early London pageants. 
Dekker appears to have had a principal share in the preparation of the speeches given 
at the several halting places of the progress. He was assisted by Ben Jonson who wrote 
the entertainment given at Fenchurch and at Temple Bar, and by Thomas Middleton 
who wrote the lines spoken at the arch above the Conduit by W.Bourne. 
From the accounts for the proceeding of King James through London, 15th March 
1604, made by Sir George Home, Master of the Wardrobe (R.O. Lord Chamberlain’s 
Booke 11.4(5), transcribed by Sir Edmund Chambers in his Shakespeare) it appears that 
Shakespeare was in the procession following the King and that for the purpose he was 
presented with a piece of red cloth. 
In a notice printed before the errata Dekker states: ‘Reader, you must vnderstand, 
that a regard, being had that his Majestie should not be wearied with teadious speeches: 
A great part of those which are in this Book set downe, were left vnspoken: So that thou 
doest here receiue them as they should have bene deliuered, not as they were.’. 
For some reason copies of this edition are very much more common than are those of 
either of the other two; we have located no less than twenty-three copies and there are 
probably others. 

}The Allde edition has, verso H-verso H2, an English translation of the oration delivered at St.Paul’s School 
in place of the same in Latin which occupies those pages in the Creede. 
tiIn the Allde edition most of the content of sheets E, H, and I, of the inner formes of C, D, and G, with 
alterations, is from the original settings of the Creede edition, reimposed to allow for the additions inserted 
in the Allde. Lines 1-9 of verso I3 of the Allde edition were badly pied; the compositor pushed the loose 

type back without regard to sense. . 
§In the Allde edition the division was apparently: sheets A-B, C-D, E-F, G, H, and I. Of these Allde printed, 

at least, A-B, and I. , 
taB.Yon: his part of King Yames his royal entertainement (q.v.], is, in effect, a supplement to the present. 
Other books on this subject were written by Gilbert Dugdale (S.T.C. 7292), Stephen Harrison (12863) 

and John Savile (21784). 

S.T.C. 6510. ArBER III. 258. Huntinotow C.L., 108. Hazuirr I, 122. Corser Collectanea 

Il], 134. ASHLEY Car. II, 30 (tp. facs.).