MS.162 WENTWORTH, WILLIAM, 2nd Earl of Strafford (1626-1695) to Lady Wentworth.
A.L.S.
7 MAY  1641 
           OXFORD 

               Description:  Paper, two leaves, folio, pp.2-3 blank. 
               PRovENANCE:   Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2754). 
               ApprESss,  p.4: For my   Aunt  my  lady Wentworth’. 

               Transcript:   Deare  Aunt.            I could not have a better opportunity to write 
               to you, then  now  by my  uncle George,  though I wish you had  stayed a little longer 
               before you had  seene him;  if then he might have stayed longer wth you. I am glad to 
               heare him  say he mett w'> noe greater opposition in y* house of Commons: (as he will 
               tell you at large) if there be any thing good to be hoped for, it seemes to me to fore- 
               token  noe ill, that the Par: produces noe more antagonists to my foe neere kindred.? 
               You  will heare a more perfect accoumpt how  things goe by my vncle, (since he is lately 
               come  frd london)  then I am  able to give you; therefore I will omitt it, and conclud, 
               cothending  you,  and us  all, to the protection of God, who is the sole raiser of his 
               servants, &  will I make noe  Doubt  in his dew time, worke out all things for y* best. 
               Farewell  Deare  Aunt, in hast 
                                                  Your  most affectionate Nephew, &  Servant, 
                                                     Strafforde® 
               Ox:  C.C.C.  7% of Ma:  1641. 
               [Postscript] 1 pray you remember   my  love to my Cosen  Rockely. 
                Nores: 1 This is probably the wife of Sir George Wentworth at that time active in the defence 
                   of his brother, the Earl of Strafford. 
                  2 How  little the writer knew of the real state of affairs may be seen from the date of this 
                                                                 ds passed the Bill of Attainder. But it 

                     letter which  was  written the day  before the Lor                 [     tt 
                      reflects the feeling, apparently well founded, that in the Commons things might take a turn 

                       for the better.                                                                  , 
                     3 This is believed to be the signature  and the letter of the great Earl of Strafford’s only son, 

                       William, who  may  at this time have used the title of Viscount Strafford.