141 CESSOLIS, Jacosus bE (fl. c.1200). 
The game and playe of the chesse. (Westminster, by William Caxton,

[Introduction begins, recto 2] {t3 He holp appoftle and doctour of the peple sapnt | Poule sapth in 
his eppftle .. . . 3 
(Explicit, recto 84, line 38] [Explicit per Caxton | } 

In a complete copy there are twenty-four illustrations from sixteen blockst. In the present there 
are ten illustrations from as many blocks, viz. recto [e6], Smithy; verso f, Draper; verso [f8], 
Money Changer; recto h2, Hosteler; recto [h7], Watchman; verso i2, Dice Player; verso (16), 
Chess Player; verso k, King; verso [k4], King and Queen; and verso [ks], Monks at Worship. 

SECOND EDITION. Translated by William Caxton. Folio in eights and sixes. Black Letter. 
Cotzation: [a] (the first, a blank)-i8; k-1®; 84 leaves (38 leaves lacking). 

Contents: blank, fol.1; introduction, fol.2; contents, verso fol.2-verso fol.3; text, recto fol.g- 
recto fol.84; colophon, recto fol.84; verso blank. (29 lines; no catchwords nor foliation). 

Eighteenth century Pembroke morocco, extra. 834 x 6% inches. In red morocco solander-case, 
by Riviere. The Pembroke (1914, Lot 50)— Huntington (private) copy with note of Thomas 
Herbert, Eighth Earl of Pembroke, on flyleaf: ‘Having the first Edition of 1474. I keep this 
also only because ’twas valued by a Friend who gave it me.’ Lacking thirty-eight leaves, the 
first a blank, viz. quires [a], b, ¢, and 1; and leaves d1-3, ¢1, £[6-7], gls], and k[6]. A small copy 
but sound and clean. 

Tuts second edition is the first illustrated and the first edition printed in England. 
Though for some time it was thought that this was the earliest book printed by Caxton 
in England, there is now no doubt that it was of a considerably later date. Blades has 
shown that the type, the justification of the lines and all the other bibliographical 
evidence point to circa 1481-3. 
The first edition which Caxton printed at Bruges, 1475, contains a dedication to the 
Duke of Clarence. In this edition, as the Duke had died, Caxton substituted a prologue 
which, though in conception no more original than the dedication, does not occur in the 
manuscripts from which he made this translation. He also corrected several misprints of 
the first edition and inserted a new conclusion, see Axon’s reprint, 1883. 
Though often noted as the earliest work on chess, Cessolis's book is only slightly 
concerned with that game. In fact, chess is used merely as the framework upon which 
is based a moral tale concerning the transformation of Evilmerodach which was effected 
by a series of incidents which illustrate the relationships of various classes of society by 
their similarity to chessmen. Caxton translated from the French versions of Jean 

+Mr. Plomer has observed that one need look no further than the woodcuts in this volume to ascertain the 

reason why Caxton seldom sought assistance of engravers. 

VOL.I [ 141 ]

Faron and Jean de Vignay but he sometimes introduced matter of his own regarding 

English affairs. ; . 
Fourteen copies of this edition can be traced of which only the Trinity College 

Cambridge and the Maurice Johnson-Britwell (unlocated) copies are perfect. Imperfect 
copies are at the Bodleian, British Museum, Vienna Imperial Library, John Rylands, 
Magdalene College Cambridge (Pepys), St. John’s Oxford, Huntington (Devonshiret), 
Morgan (Huth), A.E.Newton (Fitz William-Van Antwerp), the copies in the posses- 
sion of the Tollemache and Clifford families, and the present. Fragments are at 
Melbourne (Fenn-Van Antwerp) and the Bodleian (Douce) Libraries. 

{This copy is de Ricci No.15, according to Oldys. 

S.T.C. 4921. Durr No.82, Harn 4901. Copincer I, 152-3. Ames (Edit. Herbert) I, 76. 
SINGER T.C.C. Cat. No.3. Durr Bibl. Pepysiana 11,14. RYLAND Cat. Eng. Inc.,19. Hutu Car. I, 
288. Braves II, 95-98. De Riccr 18. 11.