MS.1g  BERKELEY,   Cuariss, 2nd Earl of Berkeley (1649-1710). 
                     A.L.S. 
                     19 AUGUST 1693 
                    HAGUE! 

                               Description:  Paper, two  leaves, quarto, pp.2-4 blank. 

                              Provenance:   Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2744). 

                           TRANSCRIPT:                                                   Hague  Aug.19th  93 
                           St Ihaue little to trouble You with this poft, only that if You think fitt You may lett 
                           his Maj'¥ know that I haue begun to treat with the Enuoy of Portugall and I make 
                           no doubt but I fhall foone giue You a good account of it for I find him uery reafonable 
                           in his defires I wifh I may haue reafon to fay the fame thing of the Enuoys of Sweden 
                           and Denmarc.  If there were wagers layd here as in England the betts would bee uery 
                           equall concerning the French Fleet, for tis uery hard to belieue they haue paffd the 
                           Streights, and left all their coafts open, and yet the States haue letters from their 
                           Refident at Madrid  That Touruill and their whoole fleet are at Malaga? and I am 

                                      [ 1154 ]

Nores:  1 Viscount Dursley was envoy  extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the States of Hol- 
                    land, From  the tone of this letter it would seem that it was addressed to the Secretary of 
                     State. 
                   2 Lediard Naval History 1735, p.675 notes: ‘About this Time, Advice came from the Consul 
                    of Oporto, dated  the ninth of June, that, on the first of that Month, an Exprefs arrived 
                    at Lisbon, from the Algarve, with an Account, that Monfieur Tourville, with the French 
                     Fleet, . . . were come into the Bay of Lagos, between Cape St. Vincent and Faro’. This news 
                    must  have been long superseded by word of the transactions which Sir George Rooke had 
                    already had  with Tourville in Lagos Bay in June.