MS.1r 

                    BROUNCKER,    Wizu14m, 2nd Viscount to John Evelyn. 

                       A.L.S. 
                       II OCTOBER 1665 
                       ERYTH 

                                   Descriptio:    Paper,  one leaf, folio. 

                               Provenance:  Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2744). 
                                                                     [ 1162   ]

TRANSCRIPT:                               On board the Flat-Hary Prize near Eryth 
                                                                                 Oct r1th 1665. 
             St Yo'S of yesterday eight at night j receiu’d near eleven in th’morning. The enclos’d 
             from the Duke  of Albemarle acquaints us that my  Ld Ashlys' deputy  Treasurer Mr 
             Kingdon  is to pay you 10,000f for the fick & wounded feamen & prison'®?, This news j 
             haue expected this two or three days, otherwise wee had been ready for a saile before 
             this. j am glad ’tis now come, & wee easd of that trouble. Pray therfore take present 
             order that the Prisoners be receiu’d on shoare, for now our care of them is determin’d, 
             and it is pitty that between us both they fhould perish, especially now when there is 
             mony  for their present reliefe. 
               Thother day  wee fent some fick prifoners to Grawesend (it being very unreasonable 
             they fhould ftay on board to infect perhaps the reft & our seamen too.) Yor officers 
             ther would not receiue them, but return’d them as they came, & made flight of us & our 
             desires. I pray let the offenders be enquir’d into & rebuk’d if not punifh’d. 
               Yor  news of the Dutch  fleets being at Solebay we haue had this two days, & our 
             fhips are getting together to attend their motion or fend them thence. Adieu. I am f* 
                                      Yo" very humble  & faithfull fervant 
                                                  Brouncker® 
             Mr  Euelyn 
             Enporsep,  by  Evelyn, p.2: Lord Brouncker on board y* Flat-Hary-prize before Eryth 
             the Vice-Adm! of  § Indies taken in § late Conflict: rith gbr 65 

              Notes:  1 Anthony  Ashley  Cooper, Lord Ashley, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury, Treasurer of the 
                  Prizes in the Dutch War. 
                 2 John Evelyn was a commissioner for the care of the sick and wounded in the Dutch War. 
                3 Lord  Brouncker was a commissioner for executing the office of Lord High Admiral.