MS.35K EVELYN, JOHN to Ralph Thoresby.
A.L.S
22 NOVEMBER 1699 
         LONDON 

               Descriprion:   Paper, 2 leaves, quarto, pp.2-3 blank, traces of seal. Hinged at p.[xxiv] of The 
               Miscellany  Writings of Yohn Evelyn 1825. 

             PROVENANCE: See MS.35A. 
             Appress, p.4: For M!  Thoresby at Leedes in York-Shire: 

            TRANSCRIPT?                                             Dover-Streete 224:No!—g9: 
             Worthy  S;  I haue no Apology  fitted for this long interval (fince I received your last 
             Communications!)   but the expectations of the perfon, whom you told me, would call 
             at my  houfe and convey  to you any thing I had to fend you: This M! Kirke? vnder- 
             takes, to whom  I haue deliver’d a prefent indeede?; but of fo very {mall value; that it 
             is from your Acceptance and  Civility alone, it can any way derive the least merit. My 
             Picture was ingrav’d by Nantueile [see Plate No.LVII] neere fifty-yeares fince*; but the 
             Sulptor [sic] fo exceedingly improv’d; that tis not to be compar’d to his modern workes: 
             The  few Lett’ roll’d-vp with it, are onely fach as haue occafionaly ben fent me by my 
             Friends, and are of no importance for their matter (as thofe were which I acquainted 
             you  had formerly ben borrow’d, and never return’d me): Thes are therefore fo many 
             Autographs  onely, which ¥ Curiofity feem’d to mention you were making a Collection 
             of: I know not whether I should haue accompany’d them with M! Gibfon & Wotton; but 
             as they are both very learned men;  the one publisher of the Saxon Chro: & the late 
             Edition of Britania: &c; the other of the Defense of Modern Learning against S' W: 
             Temple  &  Perault, & who is now writing the life of M7 Boyle: As for the rest; That of 
             K.  Charles the Martyr (dated from Oxon:) may be estimable here after: The other are 
             from  fach as haue formerly made,  & do still make a figure in oure World: But after 
             all, do in no fuch anfwer my defines to haue ferv’d you in fomething more worth your 
             acceptance,  and many   favours, particularly for that of giving me the advantage of 
             being made  know  to M'  Kirke, for whofe converfation I am oblig’d to return you the 
             humble  Thanks  of 
                                               s; 
                                                 Your very humble  fervant 
                                                    I Evelyn: 
             I deliver’d ¥ two last lett’? to D” Sloan, who I heare, is printing his Extracts in the 
             next Tranfactions. 
             I beg the favour, that when you haue an opportunity, 
              Di Gale Deane  of York, one of my Sallets, & that you will accept another your 
             it being the best my poore Potagere affords at prefent. 

                                                                     you will fend my worthy Frind 
                                                                                              felfe, 

          VOL.III                         [ 1229 ]

Notes: 1  In his Diary (1,1830,p.328) under date 1699, Thoresby  wrote: ‘I now renewed  my 
                                       correspondence with my  kind and learned friends... Mr. Evelyn... .’. 
                                     2 Thomas  Kirk, F.R.S., owner of Cookridge, friend and distant relative of Thoresby. 
                                     3 Kirk wrote  Thoresby, 2 November   1699  (Letters to Ralph Thoresby, Thoresby  Soc. Vol. 
                                       XXI,p.80): ‘I was this day to wait on Mr. Evelin but found him  not within: I will do itt 
                                       again shortly’. On 2 December 1699 (op. cit. p.82) he wrote: ‘... I have 2 parcells for you 
                                       from Mr. Evelin with a letter [i.e. the present)’. 
                                     4A  proof before letters is inlaid in this volume. It is the first of six states. Petitjean and 
                                       Wickert describe this state as ‘Rarissime’ and locate examples only in the Bibliotheque 
                                       Nationale, the Dutuit Collection, the British Museum, Windsor, Eton, and  in the cabinet 
                                       of Baron Edmond   de Rothschild.