906 

                       SHAKESPEARE,     Wituram. 
                       Mk. WILLIAM   | SHAKESPEARES     | COMEDIES,   | HISTORIES, and | 
                       TRAGEDIES.    | Publifhed according to the true Originall Copies. | The 
                       lecond Fmprefsion. | [engraved portrait, by Droeshout, third state] | LON- 
                       DON, | Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Robert Allot, and are to be fold at his 
                       fhop at the figne | of the Blacke Beare in Pauls Church-yard. 1632. | 

                               ConopHon:   Printed at London by Thomas Cotes, for John Smethwick, William Afpley, | Richard 
                               Hawkins,  Richard Meighen, and Robert Alot, 1632. | 

                                  SEconp  EpiTIoN;  Allot imprint (Smith’s Allot title No.5 and Effigies C). Folio in sixes. 

                                 Coutarion:  AS; 4;  A-Bb®;  Cc;  a-y®; aa-ccc®; ddd4; 454 leaves. (Sig A3 is signed Aa, i is I, 

                               i2 is ig, ig is 13, 13 is hg, m is M, m2 is m3, cc is bb, and ge? is 23. In some copies cc? is bb2). 

                                 Contenrs:   blank,  recto [A]; To the Reader,    in italic, signed “John Heminge.  | Henry Con- 
                                 verses, signed “B.I.’, verso; title, recto [Aa]; dell. |’, Sig [Ag]; To the great variety of Read- 
                                 verso  blank; dedication  to William,  Earl of   ers, signed ‘Iohn  Heminge.   Henry   Condell.’, 
                                 Pembroke,  and  to Philip, Earl of Montgomery,   recto Aq; verso blank;  Vpon  the Effigies, and 

[ 936 ]

Contemporary  sheep. 1234 x 834 inches. Bookplate of the Rev.Edward C. Orpent. A fine sound 
                 copy. 

                Proressor   R.M.SmitH   has pointed  out (The Variant Issues of Shakespeare's Second 
                Folio 1928) that the sheet ({A2] and [As]) containing the title (outer forme) and the 
                two poems  (inner forme), ‘Vpon the Effigies of my worthy Friend, the Author Master 
                William Shakespeare,  and his Workes’, and ‘An Epitaph on the admirable Dramaticke 
                Poet, W.Shakespeare’,  was  reset three times. Two of the settings of the outer forme 
               were  altered while the type was standing: the second setting once, and the third five 
               times. The  present copy represents the second variant of the third setting of the title, 
               and  the third setting of the two poems}. 
                  The five variations of the third setting of the title differ only in the imprint. In the 
               earliest the imprint reads as in the present except that the words ‘at his fhop’ do not 
               occur. The  present has them inserted. The other three variations substitute for Allot’s, 
               the names  and addresses of the four other publishers listed in the colophon. These pub- 
               lishers were all proprietors of one or more of the copyrights in Shakespeare’s plays{t 
               but  their interests were much  less than Allot’s and consequently the proportion  of 
               copies issued with  their names  in the imprint was  much  smaller than his with  the 
               natural result that such copies are now relatively rare. 
                  The three settings of the Effigies leaf may be distinguished by the fact that the word 
               ‘passions’ in the sixth line of the first poem differs typographically. The first reads 
               ‘pafsions’; the second  ‘paffions’; and the third ‘pafsions’, with ligatured double-s 
               (present). 
                  Professor Smith lists twenty-four other copies in this country, not including those 
               in the Folger Library, of the present combination  of title and Effigies, and there are 
               doubtless twice that number   in existence. 

                  fUntraced  in his sale, Sotheby’s 1903. 
                  tFor detailed analysis see op. laud. 
                  tin  1632  the copyright of M. of . belonged to Laurence Hayes, that of King Lear to Nathaniel Butter, 
                    of £. and C. to Henry  Walley, Richard II, Richard I1I and I Henry IV were presumably the property of 
                    Thomas   Warren, while I and IT Henry VI  were possibly now derelict besides the two already so in 1623. 
                     ‘The large interest held by Thomas and Richard Cotes, viz. the share formerly belonging to Jaggard plus 

                    Henry V, 1.A. and Hamlet, was probably represented by Thomas Cotes. 

[ 937 ] 

              VOL.III

This is the edition of which Prynne complained that it was printed on the best crown 
                             paper. 

                                                                                          W.A.CLaRK 

                                 S.T.C, 22274.  ARBER  IV. 165, 182, 194, 227, 242, 243. HuntincTon  C.L., 372. 
                                 Car. IL, 95.  BARTLETT  Mr.WV.S. No.120.