MS.36 

HAWARDE, Joun (1571-1631). 
HoLocrapu Les reportes del cases in Camera Stellata. 
1593-1609 

DescrtPrion: Paper, 2°, 187 leaves of which 13 are blank, 1134 x 734 inches, written partly in 
English and partly in a curious mixture of Law French, Latin and English, mostly in single 
column (334-4 inches) with marginal notes on either side but sometimes single column at right 
(534-634 inches) with left margin only. Many of the marginal notes (to fol.68) were made at a 
later period than the text to which they refer, and the pages containing them are numbered to 
that point in an early hand, presumably that of Hawarde, himself. The paper is uniform through- 
out with left-handled pot initialed GG watermark, very similar to Briquet 12735. The first few 
leaves have been injured by damp—top margins are repaired. This is chiefly to be regretted 
because the author's signature thereby has been destroyed except for the lower part of the 
flourish, recto fol.1. Otherwise this manuscript is in good condition, only a few of the outer 
margins having become fragile or slightly torn from use. 

  

Bivpine: Early nineteenth century half red morocco, marbled boards. Probably this was origi- 

nally bound in vellum. In rebinding the quires have in many cases been broken, presumably 
by the removal of blank leaves. Fol.33 is bound upside-down. 

Provenance: The early history of this manuscript is unknown. It was sold in the Halliwell- 
Phillipps (1859, Lot 1256) and Alfred Mortison (IV, 1919, Lot 3098) sales. 

Coutamiow: Because of the tightness of the binding, 
accurately. It appears to have been gathered mainly 

in 4, and 8, and several apparently in 10, 12, and ever 
cannot be ascertained. 

it is impossible to collate this manuscript 
in quires of 6, but there are still a number 
n 14, How many blanks have been removed 

[454]

Contents: blank, r.fol.1-v.fol.4; text, r.fol.s- In Camera stellata, termino Hillary | Elizab. 
v.fol.186; blank, fol.187. (The following are 36... . . Ends (v.fol.186, line 14) ‘| neuer 
also blank, v.fol.77-v.fol.84, fol.106; and v.fol. _ftudye there oathes. |. 
154). Begins (r.fol-s) ‘Les Reportes del cafes 

Tuts important manuscript has been edited by William Paley Baildon and privately 
printed in an edition of 250 copies for Alfred Morrison, a copy in this collection. 
The identity of the writer has been established by a reference to himself on verso 
fol.got. Hawarde was a barrister of the Inner Temple who by reason of his taking the 
trouble to write-up his rough court notes in this blank-bookt has provided unrivalled 
materials for the study of the procedure and judgements of the Star Chamber Court 
during the period covered by his notes. He has also included a few cases at Sessions 
(mostly those in which he was himself concerned as Counsel), in the Kings Bench, in 
Chancery, in the Court of Wards and one in the Exchequer Chamber. The trial of the 
Guy Fawkes traitors before a Special Commission is here reported and there is a rather 
lengthy account of the death of Elizabeth and the accession of James}{. The Lord 
Chancellor’s annual Charges to the Judges of Assize and the Justices of the Peace are 
also included. 

+The entry reads in part: ‘Ico John Hawarde del Inner temple va al Courte al Greenewiche one vn mefsenger 
del Chamber del roigne nofme. M! George Cobham, mife plur] moy p{ar] le cotiaundemite del roigne et 
fon counfelle.’. 
On recto fol.r is written ‘tos. Od.’ which may perhaps refer to the cost of this blank-book. On the same 
page in a minute hand is a Latin quatrain entitled ‘Scipionis Epitaphium’. 
Baildon has conjectured that the blank leaves, ff.78-84, were left for the proclamations and speeches 
referred to in this account.