MS.1a ANNESLEY,   Arruvr, tst Earl of Anglesey (1614-1686) to Samuel Pepys. 
          LS. 
          6 DECEMBER 1670 
          DRURY LANE 

              Descarprion:  Paper, two leaves, folio, pp.2-3 blank, seal. 
              PRovENaNce:   Pepys Papers!— Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2744). 
              ApprEss,  p.4: To  M"  Pepis  Clerke of § Acts of the Navy.  Thefe. 

             Transcript:  S*  The bearer M! Paul haveing encouragemt  to prosecute a cheat put 
            upon  his MatY by some of ¥ Navy, hath desired me to favour him with a line to you. 
             That he may see such Examinacons  & further proceedings as have been had about one 
             thousand pounds  Imprest money,  putt aboard the Henrietta, Captaine Wood  Com- 
            mander,  when  shee was one of ¥ Squadron designed for Guinny under his Highnefse 
             Prince Rupert, which Fleete on the first breaking out of the Dutch Warre was remanded 
            &  the Cap? kill’d in the first Engagement, & the money imbezzelled after his death (as 
            he is informed) And to this day though some enquiery hath been made  about it and 
            informacons given, yet the cheate so contrived is not yet fully discovered. Therefore I 
            desire you (it being for his Maties Service) that you give him libfer]ty to plerluse the 
            Bookes  in refference to this businefse and that the Clerkes be afsisting to him therein 
            and besides give him the best informacons they can. I remaine S™ 
                                            Your afsured friend 
                                                 Anglesey 
            Drury  Lane 6?  Decembt  1670 

           VOL.                            [ 1149 ]

ENporsED,  p.4: 6:xbr:70 Earle of Anglesey. To give Mt Paul ye knowledge of what 
                             informacon this Office hath rect touching ye 1000! imprested to Capt Wal Wood in 

                            anno 1664? 

                                 Nores: 1 According to Morrison’s note this letter was from the ‘Pepys Papers’ which might, of 
                                     course, have been surmised from the addressee. However, there are in this collection several 
                                     other letters not so indubitably Pepys’s which Morrison has marked in the same way. It 
                                     has not been possible to ascertain the date or method of disposal by which these ‘Pepys 
                                     Papers’ came on the market. 
                                   2 In Pepys’s Diary is recorded, under date 7 June 1666, the death of Captain Wood in the 
                                     Duke  of Albemarle’s disastrous flight from the Dutch fleet, which indicates that the date 
                                     given in the endorsement is not correct.