ENGLAND,    CommirrTEe FOR THE PUBLIC REVENUE. 
           Doc.SS. 
           7 FEBRUARY 1649 [S0]* 
           WESTMINSTER 

    MS.133 

                 Description:  Paper,  two leaves, folio, p.j blank. 
                 Provenance:   Alfred  Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2754). 

              Transcript:   By vertue of an Ordinance of both Houfes of Parliamt: of y® xx y*? day 
              of September  1643 And  in purfuance of an Order of y® Cothons afsembled in Parliamt: 
              of y® xixth day of January 1648 These are to will and require you Out of fuch Threafure, 
              as now  is or fhall be remaining in your hands of the Publique Revenue, to pay vnto 
               ffrancis Thorpe Efqt one of the Barons of y* Court of y€ Publique Excheq’ y® fore of 
               Two  hundred  and fiftie pounds, vpon his Salary of one thoufand pounds pler] anno 
              paieable quarterly vpon  the laft day of euery Terme?, due for Hillary Terme prfent 
               And for fo doing This togeather with his Acquittance for y Receipt thereof, fhall be 
               your Warrant  & Difcharge  And alfo to y* ‘Auditor General to allow y° fame in your 
               Accompt.  Dated at y® Comittee for y® Publique Revenue, fitting at Weftminfter, the 
               feauenth day of ffebruary 1649. 

              [Signed’] Tho: Grey Nic: Love  John Trenchard H  Edwardes  Greg Norton Cor. 
              Holland Hen:  Mildmay 
              To our very loving ffreind Thomas ffauconbridg 
              Revenue 

                                                               e Efq? Receiver Generall of y° Publique 

               ENDorsED,  p.2:                                         Vicefimo die ffebruar 1649 

              Received  by mee  the within named  ffrancis Thorpe Esq" one of the Barons of the 
              Court  of the publique Excheq! of Thomas ffauconberge Esq’ Receiuoé Gen‘all of the 

            VOL.                         [ 1257 ]

publique Revenue the Some  of Twoo Hundred  and  ffiftie pounds According to the 
                            Warrant within written J say recd [Signed] ff: Thorpe. Wittnes [Signed] John Planes 

                                Notes:  1 The date is Old Style from the fact that Francis Thorpe did not receive his seat in 
                                    the Exchequer  until 1 June 1649. 
                                   2 This salary evidently fell into arrears for in 1657 he petitioned Cromwell for payment. 
                                  3 The  five members of the Committee of Revenue who can be identified, viz. Thomas Grey, 
                                    Baron  Grey of Groby,  Humphrey   Edwards,  Cornelius Holland, Nicholas Love, and  Sir 
                                    Henry  Mildmay,  were all Regicides.