ELIZABETH,  Queen or Encianp. 
        DOCUMENT S. 
        27 DECEMBER 1563 
        WINDSOR 

   MS.14 

              Description:   Foolscap  folio, 2 leaves, text on p.4, lengthwise, seal impressed through both 
              leaves. Though  folded three times across, this document was never  sealed for obvious reasons. 

            Appress,  below  text: To all mayors fheriefes bayliefes conftables, cuftums Comp- 
            trollers & fearchers and to all other 6 officers mynifters and fubiectes to whom it fhall 
            appler]teign And to euery of them. 

            Transcript,  see Plate No.LIV:  Elizabeth R. [sign manual] By the Quene, 
            Whereas  we fende plrese]ntelie this bearer Valentyne Dale Doctot of Lawe in 6 fpeciall 
            meffage to our good  Cofyn the Duches  of Parma, Regent to & good brother the King 
            of Spayne, in the lowe Countreys,  We  will and comaunde yo" not onelie, to permyt 
            and fuffer him  quietlie to paffe by yO on § faid meffage wt his fervantes. vj horfe 
            money  bagges  baggnages and neceffaries w‘ out any yo? fearch let or troble, But alfo 
            to fee him furnifhed of hable poft horfes as he & his faid fervantes fhall nede, from 
            place to place by the way both going out & retorning, And alfo of a convenyent veffell 
            for his fpedy Tranfportacon  at prices reafonable, whereof faile yo not as ye tender é 
            pleafure & will anfwere for the contrary at yo" plerrelles. And thies our Lres fhalbe yo 

         VOL.IIL                         [ 1187 ]

fuffycient warrant & difcharg in that behaulf. Geven vnder of Signet at 4 Caftle of 
                           Wyndefot  the xxvijth of Decembr the fixt yere of of reign. 

                            SicNeD:  pler]. yetswert [Secretary to the Queen]. 

                           Enporsep,  p.t: Paft at Dovar the xvth day of Ienuary by the vartu of this pafporte 
                           iiij horfes by me andrewe {weting faruant to m edwardes the Searchar of Dovar. 

                           Tuts  safe conduct was carried by Dr. Dale on his second mission to the Duchess  of 
                           Parma  with  whom  he was  sent to treat concerning the depredations of the English 
                           against the Spanish merchant ships on the high seas (cf. his instructions State Papers, 
                           Foreign Series 1563, No.1547)+