VIRGILIUS  MARO,  Pusuws  (70-19 B.C.) 
                     Caxton, WiLL1AM— Translator. 

                 1026 

                      Eneydos, [Westminster, by William Caxton, p.22 June 1490]. 

                               [Prologue  begins, recto r]{fitter bpuerte werkes mabe/ trantlated and achieued” ha | upng noo werke 
                               in hande. 3 fittpng in mp ttudpe where as | Iape manp dpuerfe paunflettis and bookps ... } 
                               (Table begins, recto 3(€  Mere folometh the table of this pretent boke |... } 
                               [Text begins, recto 7]€5@  the honour of god almpghtp” and to the |... 
                               [Colophon,  recto 85, line 17] (MERE tpnvttheth the boke pt Enepdos” comppled by Br | gole” whiche 
                               bathe be tranflated oute of latpne in to frenthe | Sind oute of frenfhe reduced in to Englpfthe by me twpllin | 
                               Caxton”  the xxij. Dape of Jun. the pere of our lorde. M.itij | Clxxxx. The {pthe pere of the Regne of 
                               kpnge Wenrp  | the teuenth | } 

                                                   [ 1064 ]

mpdtnp a6 [he Hat i fette sy he mpoole of the Woslte 
                 ‘eee          of eet        dr gat   eho 
                 he Cpfee fe   aallyr fepeentrpon Hat i & fape north 
                 andy Ret   Sie name  of Ge Si feeeress) andy tonal 
                 toWardy another (tere Hat lerwth the maronners c 
                e/Yo    Bat other fyne Bat is iy Ge mpoole, Wide br 
                pet IB) cutteh iy he ene orBare He aft, as the Quctours 
                fape fe prenepesexecefteo lore Qlaany Bas ry fomtpme 
               Thc    place is callpty Orpen / Wat ie 6 (ape eft, fee 

             feo Gene co                           a 

               meh  Be  fon 
               ne, Bide mas 
               Reh Ge map as 
               Route He Wort 
              Qindy Gat  0, 
               Ha: heed is ab; 
               Epty Oapene/ 
               Bat ie  fape 
             hg        -  t 
               we   %     4 
              RG  and ts 
              weke/ Bin Ge 
              fame goth coum 

  

           "Bree Buss any 

                Bp thie xrfoy & 
               named  Gefou g 
               ae parties of 
               He  Weslo, 

   

                             VincENTIUS, MyRROUR   OF THE WORLDE  [1481]. No. 1025 
                          Showing manuscript additions made in Caxton’s printing office



Coxzation:   A®(the  last, a blank); B-L8(the last, a blank); 86 leaves (lacking 8). 

               Contents:    prologue, recto  1-verso 2; table,   vice, McK.n.1a,  verso 85; blank, 86. (31 lines; 
               recto 3-recto §; blank,  verso -verso  6; text,   no catchwords  nor foliation). 
               recto 7-recto 85; explicit, recto 85; printer’s de- 

              English eighteenth century red doeskin, extra, two green morocco labels. 10 x 734 inches. In 
              maroon  morocco  solander-case. Eight leaves lacking, two blank, viz. quire A and [L7-8]. All 
              supplied in excellent facsimile. The West (1773, Lot 1190) — Ratcliffe (1776, Lot 1214) — Hugh, 
              grd Earl of Marchmont  copy, and from him, by bequest, to the Rt. Hon. Sir George Rose (1744- 
              1818), the statesman.  It was  catalogued for sale (Library of Hugh  Campbell   Hume,  3rd 
              Earl of Marchmont,  12 May  1830, Lot 1323) but the sale did not take place and the books were 
              returned to Marchmont’s  grandson, Hugh  Scott of Harden, later Lord Polwarth. This book was 
              sold by his successor (Sotheby's 15 February 1909, Lot 64), and again at the Van Antwerp sale 
              (1922, Lot 5). With bookplate of George  Rosef (‘M’ crowned  with earl’s coronet in acknow- 
              ledgment of the bequest by Marchmont of the Cuffnells Library). On verso L3 is an early signature 
              ‘John Bryges’, possibly that of the first Baron Chandos. 

             In the prologue to this work Caxton seems  to reveal himself more completely than in 
             any other of his writings. There he discourses concerning the book itself, of the changes 
             recently introduced into the English language and how different it is from ‘euydences 
             wryton in olde englysshe . . . more lyke to dutche than englysshe’ which were shown to 
             him by John  Islip, Abbot of Westminster. He shows how deep his interest is in all these 
             matters and  how concerned  he is that this translation shall be as correct as possible. 
             To  this end Caxton  obtained  the aid of Skelton ‘to ouersee and  correcte... And 
             taddresse and expowne  where  as shalle be founde faulte to theym that shall requyre 
             it’. And in the prologue he tells at some length Skelton’s qualifications for such duties 
             in a passage of considerable importance to the biographers of the poet laureate. 
               This translation is rather far removed from Virgil. Gawin Douglas said that it was 
             no more like Virgil ‘than the devil is like St. Austin’. It is from a loose French version 
             by Guillaume  le Roy of an Italian paraphrase of portions of the Aeneid, and is, in fact, 
             a kind of eclectic romance based partly on Virgil and partly on Boccaccio’s De casibus 
             virorum. 
               Twenty  other copies can be traced of which, except for the blanks, nine are perfect. 
             Two  of the latter are at Ham  House, two  in the British Museum,  and one each  at 
             University Library Cambridge,  Bodleian (De  Ricci 96.6), Trinity College Cambridge, 
             Rylands, and  Morgan. 

                For  supplementary  notes see Bodleian Quarterly I p.266. 

              S.T.C. 24796.  Durr  No.goq.   Baves   II, 221. Copincer  III. 6159, Ames  (Edit. Herbert) 
              I, 67. SINKER  T.C.C. Cat, No.4.  Hut   Cat. V, 1539.  De  Ruccr Census 96.25,26.