App.5 

HUNNIS, Wixu1aM (fl. 1550-1597). 
AHYVE FVLL | of Hunnyef: | Contayning the Firfte | Booke of MOSES, 
called | GENESIS. | T”’RNED INTO ENGLISH | fileetre, bp VVilliam 
Hunnis, one | of the Gent. of her Maiefties Chappel, | anv #Mailter to the 
Children | of the fame. | Seene and allowed, accordinge to the | Order 
appointed. | IMPRINTED | at London in Fleetftreete, neere vnto | 
Sainct Bunltanes Church, bp | Thomas Marsh. | 1578. | Cum Priuilegio. | 
[in McK. and F.n.125] 

  

CoLopHon: IMPRINTED AT | London in Fleetftreete, | neere ynto S. Dunftanes Churche | dy 
Thomas Marfh. | 1578. | Cum Priuilegio Regie Ma-| ieftatis. | 

First EDITION. Quarto. Black Letter. 

Coxzation: [-]4; A-Kk#; 136 leaves. (Sig Gg3 is signed G3). 

Contents: title, recto first unsigned leaf; Earl 
of Leicester’s crest in garter, dated 1578 in 
type, verso; dedication to Leicester, acrostic 
in italic, signed ‘W.Hunnis.’, recto second; To 
the friendlye Reader, acrostic on William 
Hunnis, in roman, verso; woodcut of Hunnis 
arms, above 8-line verse in italic, recto third; 
T.N. In the Commendation of this his Frendes 

Trauayle, verse in roman, signed ‘Thomas 
Nevvton.’, verso; The Argument, in verse, 
fourth unsigned leaf; text, recto fol.1-recto fol. 
132; colophon, recto fol.132; verso blank. (Fol. 
3 is numbered 2, and 98 is 97. Headlines read 
‘GENESIS.’ with the chapter number to left, 
and on rectos in addition the folio number to 
right). 

Olive morocco, extra, red and blue labels on spine. 734 x 474 inches. The Chalmers (II, 1842, Lot 
1484) — Utterson (1852, Lot 1137)—Britwell Duplicate (1854, Lot 241)— Aldenham (I, 1937, 
Lot 214) copy with bookplates. The two armorial woodcuts are tinctured, apparently by a 
contemporary hand. 

Tue Corser copy at Quaritch’s, besides having the later state of the title (see foot- 
notef), has the commendatory verses on the verso of the third unsigned leaf signed 

The Corser-W.H.Crawford-Cowan-Quaritch copy had this word altered to ‘Honye’ while this sheet was 
at the press. 

[ xxv ]

“thomas Newton.’, and on the verso fol.132 has seventeen lines of errata: ‘Faultes 
escaped in the Printing of this Booke.’. The Gaisford-McKee copy, now untraced, 
which is described in the Grolier Club Collations and Notes L-W p.128, also had the 
errata. As the title of that copy was in facsimile it is not possible to know whether it 
originally had the earlier or later reading, and the description does not give the form 
of the signature of Thomas Newton. ; / 
Although this book was never reprinted separatelyt, a good portion of it was included 
in Hunnies recreations 1595. It is to modern-taste extremely dull. However, it is of 
interest today not only because it was written by this Master of the Chapel whose 
dramatic writings, if they survived or could be identified, would be of supreme interest, 
but also because it represents a form of poetry which in the sixteenth century was of 
considerable popularity{t. 
Copies of this book are uncommon. The only ones traced are the British Museum 
(title in facsimile), Bodleian (Lea Wilson§), Huntington (B.A.P.-Bindley-Perry- 
Heber-Britwell), Sir John Soane’s Museum, and Quaritch (Corser-Lakelands-Cowan). 
A fragment of two leaves is in the Cambridge University Library. 
The copyright was transferred to Thomas Orwin by Edward Marsh 23 June 1591 (Arber II. 586). Thomas 
Marsh originally entered it for a fee of ‘xij4& a copy’ which was at the usual rate of a penny for three 
sheets. 
HDudley Fenner’s Song of Songs 1587 [q.v.] belongs to this class which flourished particularly about 1550, 
e.g. the metrical translations of William Baldwin, Robert Crowley, John Hall, Francis Seager, Thomas 
Sternhold, Christopher Tye, and Sir Thomas Wyat. 

§The portrait of the Earl of Leicester which Mrs. Stopes records as being in this copy is not a ‘woodcut’ 
but a late copperplate insertion. 

S.T.C. 13974. ARBER II. 321. Hazuitr 288; II, 703.