1069 

            [WILMOT,   Joun, Eart or Rocuesrer  (1647-1680)]. 
            POEMS   | ON SEVERAL    | OCCASIONS | By  the | Right Honourable | 
            THE  | E. of R— |  [rule] | [block of 4 rows of fleur-de-lis: 355953 (last 
            two up-side down)] | [rule] | Printed at [?] Antwerp, 1680. | 

                 First(?) EDITION. Octavo. 
                 Co.tation:  A-I8; K*; 76 leaves. 

                  Conrents:   title, see cut, p.[t]; blank, pa]; text, pp.3-1515 blank, p.[t52]. (Pages numbered 
                  centrally in parenthesis. Page 130 is 132). 

                  Old sprinkled  calf, sprinkled edges. 634 x 4 inches. ‘The Britwell (March 1925, Lot 31) copy. 

               ‘THERE are two editions of this title dated 1680, as well as three undated editions, all 
               purporting to have been printed at Antwerp. The other dated edition and two of the 
               undated  ones have the same  signatures and pagination as the present and, from the 
               types used, these four might have been printed in London and possibly in the same 

          VOLE                     [ 1105 ]

shopt. They contain the same poems, some  spurious, and in the same order as in the 
                          present but, since it has not been possible to compare them other than by facsimiles of 
                           their titles, no order of priority can be assigned. The other undated edition, however, 
                          because it is a contracted reprint with, according to Prinzf, an inferior text, is evidently 
                          not the earliest and may be a piracy though doubtless all the editions were surrepti- 
                           tiously published. 
                             The other dated  edition is known only from the Bliss-Lefferts-Purdy-Huntington 
                           copy. The title, reproduced Purdy sale catalogue, differs from the present by having 
                           acomma   at the end of the sixth line; the seventh line reads ‘| E of R—- |’; the block of 
                           type-ornament consists of two rows of five pieces, the lower row being up-side down; 
                           and the imprint reads ‘| Printed at ANTWERP,    1680. |’. See Grolier Club W-P III 
                           p.219. 
                             The  two undated  editions having the same collation as the present may  be dis- 
                           tinguished as follows. One, the only copy traced is in the Kongelige Bibliotek, Copen- 
                           hagentt, see title facsimile Prinz, op. ci., has a colon at the end of the third line, a 
                           comma  at the end of the sixth, two hyphens at the end of the seventh, while the block 
                           of ornament is made up of three rows of five pieces, the imprint, as in all three undated 
                           editions, reads ‘| Printed at ANTWERPEN.    |’. The other, the only copy known was 
                           sold in the Drinkwater Sale (New York 1926, Lot 82, title facsimile), has no colon at 
                           the end of line three but has a comma at the end of line six, and three hyphens, very 
                           closely set, at end of line seven, the block of ornament is made up of three rows of 
                           fleur-de-lis: 5, 4, and 5. 
                             The  contracted undated edition collates: A-H®, I*. From the facsimile title given by 
                           Prinz, the third line has a colon at the end, the sixth has a comma, the seventh reads 
                           ‘| E. of R-|’, and the block of ornament is made up of three rows of four pieces. Copies 
                           are in the Dyce and Douce collections and in the Kongelige Bibliotek, Copenhagen. 
                             The  next dated edition is that published by Andrew Thorncome in 1685. It is rela~ 
                           tively common  and is a reprint of the present text. This same text was reprinted again 
                           in 1701, and 1702, but meanwhile  Tonson  had published, 1691, 1696, etc., Rymer’s 
                           edition which presents a somewhat improved  text. 

  

                                 tHarold  F. Brooks (Bid/. of 7.Oldham p.34) quotes a note by G.Thorn-Drury  in his interleaved copy of 
                                    Winstanley’s Lives taken from The London Gazette, Nov. 22-5, 1680: ‘Whereas there is a Libel of lewd 
                                   scandalous  Poems lately Printed, under the name of the Earl of Rochester, Whoever shall discover the 
                                    Printer to Mr. Thom L [sic] Cary, at the Sign of the Blew Boy in Cheap-Side, London, or to Mr. Will. 
                                    Richards at his house in Bow-Street Covent-Garden, shall have sl. reward.’ As neither Cary nor Richards 
                                    were connected with the Stationers’ Company it is probable that they were acting for Rochester’s family 
                                    or, at any rate, for someone intent on protecting his literary reputation. That they suspected an English 
                                    printer is not, under the circumstances, proof of English printing. 
                                      In 1689, Benjamin Crayle and Joseph Streater were prosecuted by the Stationers’ Company for printing 
                                    and publishing ‘a notorious bawdy book’, viz. Rochester's Sodom (no copy is now known—Heber’s having 
                                    been destroyed by his executors). 
                                  Hohannes  Prinz John  Wilmot Earl of Rochester 1927, pp.348-350, two only of the undated editions are 
                                    described. 
                                  THA copy of an undated edition having this collation was sold in the R.S.Turner Sale (I, 1888, Lot 2283) 
                                    and is described by Hazlitt I1I p.268, That copy has not been identified. 

                                                     [ 1106 ]

POEMS 

                ON SEVERAL 
             OCCASIONS 
                    By the 
                Right Honourable 
                   THE 

E. of R—