937 SIDNEY,   Sir Purp   (1554-1586). 
             AN  | APOLOGIE  | for Poetrie. | Written by the right noble, vertu- | ows, 
             and learned, Sir Phillip | Sidney, Knight. | Odi profanum vulgus, et arceo. | 
             [rule] | [block of type-ornament] | [rule] | AT LONDON, | Printed [by 
             James Roberts] for Henry Olney, and are to be fold at | his fhop in Paules 
             Church-yard, at the figne | of the George, neere to Cheap-gate. | Anno. 

                 1595.   | 
                  First(?) EpiTIon, Quarto. 
                  CotLartion: A(the first, a blank signed and genuine)-L4(the last, blank and genuine); 44 leaves. 

                  Contents:   blank, Sig A; title, recto[A2]; verso O/ney.’, Sig [Aq]; errata, verso [Aq]; text, recto 
                  blank;  Foure sonnets  written by Henrie  Con-    _B-verso L3; blank, Sig [L4]. 
                  stable, Sig [Ag]; To the Reader, signed ‘Henry 

                 Red  morocco, extra, by Bedford. 634 x 5 inches. The George Smith  (1867, Lot 7234)—Huth 
                 (VII, 1918, Lot 6864) copy with bookplate. 

               THERE   are two editions dated 1595, see Plate No.XLVI.  The  present, published by 
               Olney  as dn apologie for poetrie, collates A-L‘, while the other, published by William 
               Ponsonby  under  the title The defence of poetrie, collates [-]', B-K2 in fours. They are 
               quite independent textually being taken from entirely distinct manuscripts. A compar- 
               ison reveals a remarkable number of variant readings though none, except perhaps the 
               passage in the Defence of eleven lines, verso 13, lines 18-29, which does not appear in the 
               Apologie and several of the Latin quotations which are quite different in the two editions, 
               is of any great importance. 
                 Ponsonby,  who  appears to have had  direct relations with the literary executors of 
               Sidney, made  the first entry for this book, 29th November 1594, and presumably he 
               used what may  be termed an ‘authorized’ manuscript. However, it is unlikely, although 
               his entry was made more  than four months before that of Olney, 12th April 1595, that 
               Ponsonby  actually printed his edition first. In fact the Stationers’ Court which granted 

             VOL.                            [ 963 ]

Olney a license must have known nothing of Ponsonby’s Defence except the title which 
                              not being the same they regarded as of a different work. Indeed Olney himself may 
                              have been ignorant of Ponsonby’s prior rights for in the address prefixed to the present 
                              he intimates that this is the first printing. 
                                However,  Ponsonby  apparently did not long delay asserting his rights for Olney’s 
                              entry is crossed out in the Register with the  following undated comment:   ‘This 
                              belongeth to master ponsonby by a former entrance and an agreement is made between 
                              them whereby  Master Ponsonby is to enioy the copie according to the former entrance’. 
                              Just what arrangement was made  between these two proprietors is, of course, largely a 
                              matter for conjecture but it appears to have included the transfer of such copies as 
                              remained unsold in Olney’s hands to Ponsonby for at least two copies} are known which 
                              are made-up  from the sheets of the Apologie with a Ponsonby title prefixed. 
                                This treatise was written in reply to Stephen Gosson’s abusive tracts which were 
                              impudently dedicated to Sidney himself. It appears to have been written in 1581, and 
                              consequently antedates most Elizabethan critical essays in support of poetry and the 
                              poets. Itisthis work which entitles the author to rank with Daniel, Dryden and Shelley 
                              as one of the English poets who advanced the philosophy of criticism in England. 
                                Why  more  than seventeen copies of this editiont, including the two composite copies 
                              noted above, should be recorded when not more than four copies of Ponsonby’s edition 
                              can be traced$t is a problem for which there seems no adequate explanation except that 
                              Ponsonby  estimated that the market was largely satisfied with Olney’s edition and so 
                              printed only a small number, comparatively, of his own. 

                                     tThe Hoe  copy (bought at Sotheby's 6 May 1901, Lot 110) in the Huntington Library, and the Way-White 
                                       copy now  owned by the Rosenbach Company. 
                                     tThree, however, are imperfect. 
                                     tf The Locker-Van Antwerp copy is in the British Museum, The White copy, lacking the title, is at Harvard. 
                                       What  was probably a perfect copy, bound with a copy of Astrophel and Stella, was sold at Hodgson’s in 
                                       1899, but it cannot be located. There is a copy, presumably of this edition, at Chatsworth but its condition 
                                       has not been checked. 

                                  S.T.C.  22534.  ARBER  II. 295,  HuntincTon    C.L., 389.  W.A.WHITE    CaT., 141.   GROLIER 
                                  Cus   L-W,  189 (tp. facs.). Greco Capell Cat., 140.