61 

BIBLE— 1611. 
THE | HOLY | BIBLE, | Conteyning the Old Teftament, | 4ND THE 
NEW: | Newly Tranflated out of the Originall | tongues: & with the former 
Tranflations | diligently compared and reuifed, by his | Maiesties [peciall 
Comandement. | Appointed to be read in Churches. | Fmprinted at London 
by Robert | Barker, Printer to the Kings | moft Excellent Maiestie. | ANNO 
DOM. 1611. | 

Engraved title, see Plate No.V, signed ‘C Boel fecit in Richmont’, architectural with figures, 
inscribed as above. This plate, Boel’s sole English title-page, is very well engraved but rare in 
fine condition. It occurs in two states. In one, reproduced by Johnson, the vowel signs in the 
Tetragrammaton are to the left of the ‘wav’ (third letter from right), the fifth line ends with a 

  

VOL.I [71]

period, and the first ‘h’ in ‘Churches’ in the tenth line looks more like a ‘b’; in the other, e.g. the 
present, the vowel signs are belowt the ‘wav’, the fifth line ends with a colon, and the ‘b’ in 
‘Churches’ appears to have been altered. From the corrections it appears that the present state 
is the later. 
The engraved map of Canaan, inner forme of sheet D1-2, drawn by John Speed after Dr. John 
More, dated 1611, is Fry No.14; the index on reverse is Fry No.20. There are two engravings 
of this map which occur without discrimination. One, signed by Elstrack, has the sea shaded; 

  

the other, unsigned, e.g. the present, has the sea stippled. 

First eprTion of the Royal Version (‘He’ Bible). Folio in sixes. Black Letter. 

Cottation: A®; B?; C8 (Sig C2 is signed A2); D*; A-C®; D?; A-5C; A-Aa®; 752 leaves. 

Contents: engraved title, recto [A]; verso 
blank; dedication to King James, in roman, 
recto A2-recto A3; The Translators to the 
Readers, in roman, verso A3-verso [B2]; cal- 
endar, rubricated, recto C-verso [C6]; An Al- 
manacke for xxxix. yeeres, rubricated, recto D; 
To finde Easter for euer, rubricated, verso; 
The Table and Kalendar, recto D2-recto [D4]; 
The names and order, in roman, verso [D4]; 

Scriptures, verso [A]-verso [C6]; Land of Ca- 
naan, An Alphabeticall Table, in roman, outer 
forme, engraved map, inner forme, recto D- 
verso D2; text of Old Testament and Apocry- 
pha, recto A-verso [5C6]; title to the New 
Testament, dated 1611, in compartment McK. 
and F.n.231, recto [A]; verso blank; text, recto 
A2-verso [Aa6]. (Pages box-ruled, two columns, 
59 lines). 

royal arms, recto [A]; The Genealogies of Holy 

Late seventeenth century red morocco, richly tooled back, inside dentelles, gilt edges. 16 x 1034 
inches. The Apocrypha is bound separately in old marbled boards, deerskin back. 161% x 11 
inches. This book is from the library of Andrew Fletcher (1655-1716f), the Scottish patriot. It 
has his signature on the engraved title and again on the binding and first page of the ¢pocrypha. 
The binding is a magnificent specimen of its kind and the volume is clean and sound throughout, 
every leaf of the first state, and with no washing or shadow of sophistication. 

Tue present is the first edition of the ‘Royal’, usually but erroneously known as the 
‘Authorized’ ft, Version. It is the first ‘He’ Bible, so-called from an unusual but correct 

Dr. Alexander Marx says that the second vowel sign would no longer be used. 
tFletcher’s library of over scoo volumes collected partly during his travels in Spain and Hungary has been 
preserved until recently in a room specially built for it and marked by a tablet in his memory at Saltoun 
Hall, Pencaitland, Haddingtonshire. Of Fletcher, Wodrow, the Scottish historian, wrote ‘one of the bright- 
est of our gentry, remarkable for his fine taste in all manner of polite learning, his curious library, his 
indefatigable diligence in every thing he thought might benefit his country’. In the past a few books have 
strayed from the library, ef. R.A.Scott Macfie Bibliography of Andrew Fletcher pp.2-4. 
$}How this version became generally known as the “Authorized Version’ is obscure. The statement ‘Appointed 
to be read in Churches’ which appears on both titles of this edition as well as on the titles of many, though 
by no means of all early reprints, does not mean ‘Authorized’ but, as pointed out in the preliminary 
matter, simply how the Scriptures were pointed out or ‘appointed’ for public reading. This ‘Appointment’ 
was later transferred to the Prayer-Book and left out of the Bibles although the phrase was retained on 
the title long afterwards, In many editions of the Bishops’ Bible which this version superseded the title 
stated that it was ‘Authorised and Appointed to be read in Churches’. The similar phrase of the present 
may be reminiscent of that earlier use, however see Pollard Records pp-58-60. 

[72]

C onteyning the Old Teftament, 
AND THE NEW 

i Newly Tragilated of the Original 
tongues:€9 with the former Tranflations 
diligently compared and rewifed, by hs 
“Maieéhitefpectall Coinand

reading in Ruth HIL.15. That reading was repeated in a whole series of Bibles, in folio, 
quarto, and octavo, printed and dated 1611 to 1640, just as was another similar series 
which has the reading ‘She’ in the above passage and is derived originally from the 
second edition of the Royal version, dated 1611, and known as the ‘She’ Bible. The 
priority of the present edition was first firmly established by the Rev. W.E.Smith, 
Vicar of Corton, in 4 Study of the Great ‘She’ Bible (reprinted from The Library January, 
March, and April 1890) who based his conclusions upon bibliographical rather than 
textual evidence. There are stil! some questions unsettled regarding the composition 
and printing of this great version which is perhaps the most important single influence 
upon the development of English prose style. They may be found discussed at great 
length in Lovett’s The English Bible in the ¥.Rylands Library, 1899, and in the works 
there cited. 
There were five other editions in folio which are paginary reprints of this first edition 
and copies are usually found, upon examination, to be made-up, generally at a more 
or less recent date, with leaves from some other edition. In fact any copy in a nineteenth 
century binding or which by any chance has passed through the hands of either Lea 
Wilson or Francis Fry may be suspected of sophistication. Though perhaps half a dozen 
complete copies might be found in private hands it may well be doubted if any copy 
known surpasses the present in unimpeachable splendor. 
In their report, 16 November 1618, to the Synod of Dort on the making of this ver- 
sion (Pollard Records pp.336-9) the English theologians stated that it was part of King 
James's plan that a complete Genealogy and Map of the Holy Land should be appended. 
In October 1611, John Speed obtained a privilege for ten years from James that his 
Genealogies and Map of Canaan should be sold with every copy of the Bible. He engaged 
to supply the stationers with various sizes at prices ranging from sixpence to two shil- 
lings a copy. His privilege was renewed several times until, in 1638, he sold his stock 
and rights to the Stationers’ Company for £700. From the unpublished records of the 
Stationers it appears that the decorative borders and panels with which the Genealo- 
gies were printed as well as the plates for the Map were Speed’s property and that he 
employed William Hall and John Beale (from the ornaments in the present edition), 
later Beale alone (from records of a dispute which Speed had with him, 20 August 1623, 
Court Book C 78>), and, finally, John Dawson (from ornaments found in later editions) 
to print the Genealogies. As Speed sold his stock to the Stationers’ Company in whole- 
sale lots while booksellers obtained their copies of the Bible from the King’s Printer 
and the Genealogies from the Company's warehouse it is not at all remarkable that 
copies of this first edition occur with variant settings of the Genealogies. 
The separate binding of the Apocrypha in this copy is of more than passing interest. 
At the Synod of Dort in 1618 the Puritan party made a strong though unsuccessful 
effort to remove the Apocrypha from the Bible. In England the opposition came espe- 
cially from the Presbyterians and took final form in the Westminster Confession, 1648: 
‘The books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of divine inspiration are no part 
of the Canon of the Scripture and therefore are of no authority in the Church of God, 

VOL.I {73 ]

61A 

nor to be in any otherwise approved, or made use of, than other human writings’. The 
progress of this exclusion may be traced in the records of the various Conferences from 
the Hampton Court (1603) to the Savoy (1668), but for our purpose a survey of the 
effect upon the Bibles published during the seventeenth century is perhaps of more 
immediate interest§. Occasional copies of the Royal Version in various sizes before 1648 
occur with the Apocrypha cut out but no edition, other than the duodecimo ones dis- 
cussed in No.64, was apparently published without it. In 1648, a quarto edition was 
printed in which the Apocrypha was not required by the signatures, although still 
retained in the list of books. Thereafter it was omitted in an increasing proportion of 
editions until, towards the end of the seventeenth century, very few editions, even in 
folio, contain it. In Scotland apparently the feeling was stronger than in England for 
Archbishop Laud so far recognized its existence as to reduce the public use of the 
Apocrypha to six lessons for Saints’ days when preparing his ill-fated Scottish Booke of 
Common Prayer 1637. 
It is therefore not surprising that this copy which was bound probably about 1690 
has had the Apocrypha removed. But it is remarkable that so choleric a person as 
Andrew Fletcher (he killed more than one man in anger) should have preserved that 
portion which he would not admit to the honour of full morocco—perhaps he there 
showed himself a true Scot. 
Though it may be heresy to suggest it, there is some reason for doubting if the wood- 
cut general-title was ever originally issued with the first ‘He’ Bible. The proper title is 
unquestionably the engraved one by Boel, reproduced by Fry in original size. However, 
the woodcut title is found in a few otherwise unexceptionable copies and all authorities 
appear to accept it as genuine. Nevertheless, if it was originally so issued then it is 
necessary that several apparently contradictory phenomena should be explained. In 
the first place, the letterpress which is found in those titles is from the identical setting 
which occurs in the earliest edition of the ‘She’ Bible, whereas the leaf conjugate with 
the title in the first ‘He’ Bible is Sig [A6] while in the first ‘She’ Bible it is Sig [Aq]. No 
other leaves, except sheets S1-6 and V3-4 of the New Testament, are identical in the 
two editions. Furthermore, as an anonymous writer in the Athenaeum (20 September 
1884) pointed out, there is no real evidence that the woodcut compartment was actually 
prepared before the copperplate, although it is generally asserted that the woodcut was 
employed because Boel’s plate was not yet ready. 

§Regarding the omission of the Apocrypha from some editions of the Geneva Bible, see No.60. 

S.T.C, 2216. Huntincron C.L., 34. DarLow AND Move I No.240, 

BIBLE- 1611. 
THE | HOLY | BIBLE, | Conteyning the Old Tefta- | ment, and the 
New: | Newly Tranflated out of | the Original Tongues: and with | the 
former Tranflations diligently | compared and reuifed by his | Maiefties 

[ 74]

fpeciall Com-| mandement. | § Appointed to be read in Churches. | [rule] | 
{ IMPRINTED | at London by Rodert | Barker, Printed to the | Kings 
moft Excellent | Maieftie. | [rule] | ANNO DOM. 1611. | [in compart- 

ment, McK. and F.n.231] 

First Epition of the Royal Version (‘He’ Bible). Folio in sixes. Black Letter. 

Cottation: A-B4 (1634 edition); C® (Sig C2 is signed A2); D4; A-c& (Genealogies, Sig A lack- 
ing); Ee? (Map); A-5C®; A-2®; 6D® (1640 edition); 751 leaves present. 

Contents: general-title, the proper state is 
reproduced Lovett Cat. of 7.Rylands Bibles p. 
244, recto [A]; verso blank; dedication to 
James, in roman, recto A2—recto [Aj]; The 
Translators to the Reader, in roman, verso 
[A3]—verso [B4]; calendar, rubricated, recto 
C—verso [C6]; Almanack, rubricated, recto D; 
To find Easter, rubricated, verso; The Table 

names and order of all the Bookes, in roman, 
verso [D4]; Speed’s Genealogies, recto A— 
verso [C6]; Map, recto Ee—verso [Ee2]; text 
of Old Testament and Apocrypha, recto A— 
verso [5 C6]; title to the New Testament, dated 
1611, in compartment, McK. and F.n.231, recto 
[A]; verso blank; text, recto A2—verso [6D6, 
sic]. (Pages box-ruled, two columns, $9 lines). 

and Kalender, recto D2—recto [D4]; The 

Green morocco, extra, with Curzon arms on sides. 1534 x 1034 inches. The Curzon-Zouche (1920, 
Lot 74) copy with bookplate of Adam Sim. Coulter. 
When last catalogued by a bookseller no defects were mentioned although when sold in the 
Baroness Zouche sale this copy had two states of Boel’s engraved title and was of the first edi- 
tion throughout. The leaves at beginning and end have since been substituted as may be seen 
by the gilding on the edges. The general-title is altered from the 1613 edition as may be seen by 
an examination of the paper, by the state of the compartment, and by the fact that the rule over 
the date is considerably longer than in the 1611 title. Sig A2—By4 of the preliminaries are from 
the edition of 1634. The title to the Genealogies is lacking. Sig G, containing the repeated passage 
in Exodus XIV.10, is cut out and that leaf from the 1611 ‘She’ edition substituted. The last 
quire of the New Testament is from the edition of 1640. The map of Palestine is from the same 
plate as Fry’s No.14 but inscribed in the space below ‘CANAA’ is an imprint: ‘Are to be fold 
by Tho: Bafset | in Fleet ftreet and Ric: Chifwell | in St Pauls Churchyard.’ On the reverse is 
‘THE DESCRIPTION OF PALESTINE’ with pages numbered 55-6. This state probably was 
issued in the seventies or eighties of the seventeenth century. The Genealogies belongs to Fry’s 
edition No.2. With the exceptions noted above, every leaf belongs to the first issue of the first 
edition, W.E.Smith’s ‘A’ text.