940 SKELETON, JOHN (c. 1460-1529)
Here after followeth certayne bokes copyied by mayster Skelton
Poet Laureat whole names here after shall appere...

CoLopHon:  ‘[@nb prpnted bp Rpchard Lant/ tor | Benrp Tab  Dwellpng in | Poules ehurche pacd | 
                 at the {pane of | Judith | ¥ | ‘RL’, ornamental, with small figure of Christ(?) between] } 

                  First EXTANT  EDITION.  Octavo. Black  Letter. 
                  Cottation:  A-D8;  32 leaves (lacking last two). 
                  Contents:  title, recto [A]; verso blank; text, recto A2-{verso [D8]; colophon, verso [D8]}. 

                 Nineteenth  century green roan. 534 x 334 inches. The last two leaves are lacking. The Daniel 
                 (1864, Lot 1529)—Huth    (VII, 1918, Lot 6884) copy with bookplate. 

               Tuts  is the earliest extant collected edition of Skelton’s works, though it is by no means 
               complete.  However,  the very fact that it does not include the Philip Sparrow or Why 
               come ye not to court is evidence, ad silento, that they may have been by that time avail- 
               able in printed form (see Toy edition of Philip Sparrow). 
                  There are two other undated editions of the Certain Books which, because this is the 
               only one in which  the virgule is used, are of a later datef. 
                 Two  copies of this edition which were apparently bound up at an early date with the 
               Kele editions of Philip Sparrow, Colin Clout (q.v.], and Why come ye not to court have 
               survived, viz. the Freeling copy in the British Museum   and the Inglis-Tite-Locker- 
               Hagen  copy  in the Huntington  Library. All four of these books were published about 
               the same  time and copies may  have originally been issued in sets. However, there is a 
               copy  of this edition at Wadham   College, Oxford, which  is bound in an eighteenth 
               century binding with copies of the Toy issues of Philip Sparrow and Why come and the 
               Marshe   issue of Colin Clout which, possibly, indicates either that more copies of the 
               present were published than of the Kele editions or that this book is of a slightly later 
               date. 
                 One  of the pieces listed on the title, The deth of . . . Edwarde the fourth, is probably 
               spurious (cf. Brie Engl. Stud. XX XVII, p.27) but the volume contains four pieces, not 
               there listed, which, presumably, are genuine, viz. ‘Howe euery thynge  must haue  a 
               tyme’, ‘Prayer to the father of heuyn’, “To the seconde parson’ and “To the holy goost’. 

                   }The  edition ascribed to ‘[R.Lant for H. Tab] 1547’ in the Short-Title Catalogue (No.22606) is a ghost; the 
                      Bodleian copy, the only one cited, being an imperfect copy of Day's edition (S.T.C. No.2260o), [q.v.}- 

           VOL.IIT                          [ 967 J

The  short piece ‘All nobyll men, of this take hede . . . ’ is prefixed to the several 
                               editions of Why come ye not to court. 
                                  Besides the present and the three copies noted above, the only other of which  we 
                               can find record is the fine Ashburnham copy which  cannot now  be located. 

                                 S.T.C. 22598.   Huntinoton   C.L., 391.  Hutu  Cat.  IV, 1361.   Locker  Car. (1886) 117.