MS.125 

                     COOPER,   Antuony Asutey, Earl of Shaftesbury [to John, Duke of 
                     Lauderdale]. 
                     ALS. 
                     23 JULY 1671 
                     LONDON 

                                  Description:   Paper, one leaf, folio, p.2 blank. 
                                  Provenance:    Alfred Morrison  (IV, 1919, Lot 2754). 

                            TRANSCRIPT:                                                   London  July 23 1671 
                             My  lord          There  is a pacquett come to my lord Arlington that the King was 
                             forced into Dartmouth  fryday at three in the afternoon and refolves to ftay there 
                             vatill to morrowe morning, he has fent M™ Godolphin! to lay coaches for him that he 
                             may  goe by land if the wind will not allowe before that time a paffage by fea which 
                             he will rather make ufe of; J am in dispute what is fitt for me in this cafe, all my 
                             Prouifions are putt of foe that if his maiefty come to me J fhall not appear as J would; 
                             yett if the king come by land his way is but two miles of my house? and his company 
                             can be but {male; my lord J fubmitt my felf in this as in all things elfe wholly to your 
                             iudgment, therefore fend me your advice by this bearer; if your lordship defignes to 
                             goe with me fend your coach to Guildford this night and lett him goe eafily to farnham 
                             to morrow morning  and J will call you by feaven in the morning att Ham  with my 
                             coach and when  we come  to farnham yours fhall carry us to Winchefter and foe by 
                             Tuesday night to my hous which is as foone as the King can be there or as farr. When 
                             your lordship has represented me a moft devoted fervant of my lady diserts? and have 
                             confulted my affair with her J have noe more but that J am eternally 
                                                             My  lord Your moft faithfull Humble servant 
                                                               Ashley 

                                            [1252]

Nores:  1 Sidney Godolphin, courtier, cf. MS.351. 
                  2 At  Wimborne  St. Giles, in Dorsetshire. 

                  3 Elizabeth, Countess of Dysart, Lauderdale’s second wife whom he married 17 February 
                    1672.