MS.1j BOURCHIER,     Witu1am, sth Baron Fitz-Warine, 3rd Earl of Bath 
          (fl.1560-1623). 
          DOCUMENT  8. 
          9 DECEMBER  1605 

                Description:   Paper, one leaf, folio, verso blank, 
                Provenance:    Alfred Morrison  (IV, 1919, Lot 2744). 

              Transcript:  The Examinacon  of John Langhearne  late of Cyftowe in the Countie of 
              Glamorgan  in Wales gent taken the ix‘ daye of Decemb’ Anno. 1605. 
                This Examinate  faith that he is fonne to one Watkyn Langhearne a Juftice of Peace 
              in the Countie of Glamorgan aforfaid and that he is alyed vnto M™ Lewys Incledons 
             wief of Bramton.  And he faythe that he and one Laudeth came out of Wales to Barn- 
              ftable fayre laft wth xxiij Bullockes w°h he boughte in Wales not farre from his Fathers 
              houfe, and they folde the faid Bullockes at Molton and Torrington fomewhat before 
              the faid Faire, but what their names are that bought them he knoweth not. And beinge 
              demaunded  what  caufe or buyfines he had to staye thus longe in the Countrye faithe, 
              that about five weekes paft or more he had fome conferrence wth Mt Richarde Cole 
              about the providinge of certeine Bullockes for him, and therevppon fent his boye to his 
              Brother Robert Langherne  to procure xx Bullockes and ever fince hathe remayned in 
              this Countrie expectinge the retourne of his fayd fervaunte: And faith that he hath 
              fent another Meffenger about the fame buyfineffe, and hath not yet heard from them. 
                Beinge demaunded   what monie  was payed for the faid Bullockes fold at Molton & 
              Torrington, faithe that he for his part had onelie eighte poundes & tenne shillinges And 
              sayth that his partner had the reft. 
                Beinge afked what Mainetenaunce  he hath to lyve on faithe that his Father alloweth 
              him .208 a yeare, And he alfo faith that he is fervaunte to the Lo: highe Admirall of 
              England  vnder whome  he hath the Office of Martiall of the Admiraltie wh is worthe 
              him 4of the yeare. 
                Beinge alfo demaunded  whither ever he was called before this time in queftion for 
              anie mifdemeano"  faythe that he was not, favinge that about .4. yeres paft he was 

             VOL.IIT                           [ 1157 ]

called before the Counfeyll in the Starre Chamber about a certeine Ryott w«h happened 
                             betwene  S* Willm  Herberte  & M™  Edmonde    Mathewe,  in the w°h dyvers  men  were 
                            hurte?.                          [Signed] W: Bathon? 
                             Notes: 1 No record of this riot can be found either in the calendars of the P.R.O. or in Hawarde’s 
                                 Cases. 
                                2 Bathonia is the latin form of Bath. Why Bourchier should use this ecclesiastical style is 
                                 not apparent.