12 

ARTE OF ENGLISH POESIE. 
THE ARTE | OF ENGLISH | POESIE. | Contriued into three Bookes: 
The firft of Poets | and Poefie, the fecond of Proportion, | the third of Or- 

VOL.I [15]

nament. | [printer’s device, McK.n.222] | AT LONDON | Printed by 
Richard Field, dwelling in the | black-Friers, neere Ludgate. | 1589. | 

First EDITION. Quarto. 

Contation: AB‘ (the first, a blank, lacking); C-H4; 1?; K-LI*; M? (the last, blank and genuine) ; 
131 leaves present. 

Contents: (blank, Sig [AB]}; title, recto [AB2]; inscribed, ‘4 colei’ (above) and ‘Che fe ste/fa 
verso blank; dedication to Burghley, in italic, ra/somiglia | & non altrui. |’ (below)t, verso; 
dated 28 May 1589, signed ‘R[ichard]. Flield].’, text, pp.1-92, 101-258; Table, pp.[259-60]; The 
Sig AB3; blank, recto [AB4]; woodcut, Eliza- names of your figures Auricular, Sig Mm; 
beth, half-length, with crown, orb and scepter, _ blank, Sig [Mm]. (P.233 is numbered 235). 

Black morocco, sumptuously inlaid and tooled in Mearne pattern, red morocco doublures, green 
moire end-leaves, by the Club Bindery, 1902. 73 x 5} inches. In red morocco piped slip-case. 
Sold Sotheby’s 3 December 1900. The Hagen (1918, Lot 984) copy with bookplate. 

Four copiest of this book can be traced which have inserted a chapter ‘Of the device or 
embleme, and that other which the Greekes call Anagramma, and we the Poesie trans- 
posed.’ The introduction of this additional matter, which occupies eight pages, was 
made while the outer forme of sheet N was still in the press for the last paragraph on 
verso [N4] was removed and a new passage substituted without otherwise disturbing 
the type. The remainder of the added material was then set up on an unnumbered sheet 
(signed i, ii, and iii on the first three leaves) on the verso of the last leaf of which the 
original setting of the last paragraph of Sig [N4] was inserted. 
One can only speculate concerning the causes of this insertion but from the fact that 
between sheets O and P there is a gap in the pagination of eight pages, which is the exact 
number which the inserted chapter occupies, it would seem that the inserted chapter 
was part of the original manuscript but that in the manuscript it did not occur at the 
point where it was later placed in the printed text and that its omission was caused by 
the compositors’, of whom there may have been several, misreading of an author’s di- 
rection. 
There are two settings of the inner forme of sheet Ee, the present copy has the later. 
In the first, p.206 contained a passage which was strongly anti-Dutch in sentiment. It 
begins (quoting Arber’s reprint p.252): ‘And consulting vpon the affaires of the low 
countreis at this day, peraduenture her Maiestie might be thus aduised: The Flemings 

tAccording to Dr. Greg this block in the Capell copy has an added inscription ‘ELIZABETH.D.G.REGINA’ 
printed in blind. The only other copy of this book in which it is visible is the Ben Jonson-Grenville copy but 
in 1597, it appears in T.T.’s 4 booke, containing the true portraiture of the kings of England and, in 1600, there 
are vestiges of it in impressions of this block found in Holland’s translation of Livy [q.v.]. In this last a 
recutting of the face of Elizabeth is inserted in the block. This later cutting is of a face considerably older 
than the original engraving. See Plate No.III. 
YOf these, two are in the British Museum (one Ben Jonson’s); one, the Walpole-Hoe, is in the Huntington, 
and another, the Stanley-Sykes-Britwell copy, is now owned by Bernard Quaritch, 

[ 16 ]

ELIZABETH 

Second state, Livy Romane Historie 1600. No. 495

are a people very vnthankfull and mutable, and rebellious against their Princes . . . ” 
Before many copies with that setting had been printed it was observed that such a 
sentiment was not at that time consonant with the foreign policy of the day and so the 
obnoxious paragraph was replaced by a new one which being of 16 lines instead of 15 
crowded the page as reset so that the heading ‘CHAP.XX.’ had to be printed on a line 
with the end of the preceding paragraph. At the same time typographical corrections 
were introduced on p.207. The new paragraph begins: ‘And thus againe, it hath bene 
alwayes vsuall among great and magnanimous princes in all ages, not only to repulse 
any injury...’ 
Mr.B.M. Ward has (R.£.S.1(1925) 284) shown that the traditional ascription of this 
important work to George Puttenham cannot be supported by internal evidence. He 
has presented some ingenious reasons for attributing it to John Lord Lumley, but in 
that his argument is not strong enough to be considered as proved. Within two years of 
publication apparently it was attributed to Puttenham (WN. & Q. 11th, I, 404) but as 
Mr. Ward shows that may have been due to intentional mystification on the part of the 
publisher or publisher and author combined. The sheet with double signature AB is 
perhaps a cancellans}{ replacing original dedicatory and preliminary matter which 
revealed the identity of the author but which was cancelled for reasons not now known. 

tfAn examination of several copies with this in mind seems to show that the second and third leaves of the 
quire AB form a half-sheet not apparently conjugate with the outer two leaves which possibly are all that 
remain of the cancellandum. 

S.T.C. 20519. ARBER II. 506, 518. Huntincton C.L., 343. HurH Cat. IV, 1202. BARTLETT 
Mr.W.S.No.234. GRoviER CLus L-W, 174 (tp. facs.). SINKER T.C.C. Cat. No.736. Grec Capell 
Cat., 108. Hoe Car. III (1903) 349.