667 

MARSTON, Joun. 
THE | WORKES | OF | M™ IOHN MARSTON, | Being | Tragedies and 
Comedies, | Collected into one | Volume. | [rule] | [ornament, mask with 
rings] | [rule] | LONDON, | Printed [by Augustine Mathewes] for WIL- 
LIAM SHEARES, | at the Harrowe in Britaines | Burffe. 1633. | [in 
double-rule border] 

FIRST COLLECTED EDITION; first issue, Octavo. 

Cottation: A4(the first, a blank, lacking); B-Dd8(the last three, probably blank, lacking); 208 
leaves present. (Sig Ng is signed M3). 

  

Contents: general-title, recto [Aa]; verso recto Aj-verso Aq; text, six plays, separate 
blank, dedication to the Viscountesse Fawk- titles to all but first, recto B-verso (Dds). 
land, in italic, signed ‘WILLIAM SHEARES.’, 

Eighteenth century mottled calf, extra, marbled edges. 534 x 334 inches. The Arbury (1920, Lot 
202)—G.D.Smith (II, 1920, Lot 233) copy with Newdigate 1709 bookplate. 

Ir has long been accepted that the general-title reading ‘Tragedies and Comedies’ 
(reproduced Church Cat. II, 640) was the earlier. Indeed, Sheares’s dedication (which 
does not occur in copies having that title) would appear to support that contention for 
there Sheares refers to the odium under which everything connected with the stage lay 
at that time, i.e. the very year in which Prynne’s Histriomastix [q.v.] was publishedt. 
From this it was inferred that the “Tragedies and Comedies’ title was cancelled in favor 
of the more innocuous one reading ‘Workes’. 
However, an examination of unsophisticated copies reveals that the present title is 
an integral part of the first half-sheet and that the “Tragedies and Comedies’ title is 
acancel (cf, Greg R-E.S. I, 105). The volume was first issued with the present title and 
dedication, both mentioning Marston’s name, and with his name or initials, repeated on 
each of the separate titles, and signed to the epistles prefixed to Sophonisha and 
Parasitaster. 
When this edition came to the author's attention he was presumably much exercised 

}Sheares says of this volume which includes The Dutch Courtesan that it ‘is free from all obscene speeches’! 

VOL. [ 687 ]

for since taking orders in 1609 he had renounced all connection with the stage. It has 
been suggested (Brettle Trans. VIII, 1927, 339) that perhaps through his ‘ancient 
friend’ Henry Walley, bookseller and at that time Clerk of the Stationers’ Company, 
Marston was able to force Sheares to remove all trace of the author’s name from copies 
remaining in his hands. This was effected by substituting the ‘Tragedies and Comedies’ 
title, cancelling the dedication and substituting new separate titles and epistles 

throughout. 
There also appear to be two settings of sheet N (Brettle op.cit.). In the earlier, of 
which the present is an example, the first line of recto N reads‘... bloud...', 

in the later‘... blood...’ 
The text of this collected edition is taken from the separately printed quartos, but 
whether Sheares obtained permission from the holders of the copyrights cannot be 
determined. Presumably he did for otherwise there would probably have been some 
action against him which would be recorded in the Registerst. 

As far as can be traced Thomas Lownes owned the copyright to Anfonio and Mellida, presumably also to 
Antonio's Revenge (Arber 1V.176). William Aspley, who still was alive in 1633, probably retained the 
rights to the Malcontent and perhaps he had acquired the rights to Sophonisba on the death of John 
Hodgetts who had acquired them in 1613 (Arber ILI.s21), and to the Parasitaster on the death of William 
Barrett who had acquired them in 1617 (Arber I1I.603) as well as to What you will on Thomas Thorpe’s 
death for he had been in some sort of partnership with all these men. In any case, the Insatiate Countess 
which is the only previously published play which Sheares did not include was evidently jealously guarded 
by the owners for in 16gr it passed from Thomas Archer to Hugh Perry (Arber IV.248), and from him 
to Henry Taunton in 1634 (Arber IV.327). 

S.T.C. 17471, Huntinoron C.L., 277, Hazurr I, 280. Lownpes III, 1487. Hor Car. IIT 
(1903) 123. 

MARSTON, Joun— Part author 
See CHAPMAN, GEORGE Eastward Hoe 1605. 

MARTIN, Grecory (d.1582) Translator 
See BIBLE The nevo testament 1582.