633 

(LYLY, Jouw]. 
A | mofte excellent Co- | medie of Alexander, | Campafpe, and Dio- | 
genes, | Played beefore the Queenes Ma- | ieftie on twelfe day at night, 

{ 654 J

by | her Maiesties children, and the | children of Poules. | (:.*) | [three blocks 
of type-ornament] | Imprinted at London for | Thomas Cadman. | 1584. | 
[in broad border of type-ornament] 
First Eprtion. Quarto. 

Couzation: A*(the first, blank except for petit fer on recto, lacking); A-P4; 27 leaves present. 

Contents: title, recto [Aa]; verso blank; The logue at the Blacke Fryers, recto [F4]; The Epi- 
Prologue at the black Friers, Sig A3; The Pro- logue at the Court, verso [F4]. (The headlines 
logue at the Court, recto [Ag]; verso blank; on versos read ‘A éragicall Comedie of’ and on 
text, recto A(repeated)-recto [F4]; The Epi- rectos “Alexander and Campa{pe.’). 

  

Nineteenth century red pin seal, neat. 734 x 5 inches. The Holgate (1845) —Britwell (1922, Lot 
450) copy with bookplate. 

Tuere are three editions of this comedy dated 1584f and of these, according to the 
evidence presented below, the edition to which the copy here described belongs is the 
earliest. It has not been possible to confront these editions for no one library possesses 
the three. However, Professor R.W.Bond (The Complete Works of ¥.L. 11 (1902) 302- 
360) has given a collation of the other two editions (no copy of the present edition 
having been available when his work was in progress), and so, by this indirect means 
the data here set forth have been derived. 
‘These three editions have the same collation but may be easily distinguished by the 
readings of their titles. In that edition which Bond believes to follow next after the 
present but which we shall attempt to prove to be the third, the title reads: ‘Campaspe, | 
Played beefore the | Queenes Maicstie on | newyeares day at night, by her | Maiesties 
Children, and the | Children of Paules. | { Imprinted at London | for Thomas Cadman, | 
1584. |’. Of that edition the only known copy is the Dyce. In the other edition, of which 
copies are the British Museum (Garrick) and Bodleian (Malone), the title reads as in 
the Dyce except that the fourth, fifth and sixth lines read: ‘. . . by | fer Maiesties 
Childré, and | the . . .’. That these variant titles represent distinct editions and not 
merely variant issues seems to be established by the fact that none of the signature 
positions of the present coincide with those of the other two editions (op. cit. p.304) 
except for the position of the signature on recto E which appears to be the same in 
both the present and the Dyce edition, That sheet, however, is not from the same 
setting in both these-editions by reason of the variant readings of its text which cannot 
well be explained as alterations made while in the press. 
‘The evidence regarding the relationship of these editions is, for the most part, 

  

{This volume was apparently printed by Thomas Dawson. 
{There seems to be no reason for suspecting that all three of the 1384 editions were not printed in that year 
for it should be remembered that this was the first of Lyly’s comedies and introduced a new style and 
antic drama which was exceedingly popular being copied by Shakespeare in his earliest 

  

VOL. [ 655 ]

internal. Chambers conjectured that the present edition is the earliest, partly because 
‘a correction in the date of Court performance (cf. the three titles) is more likely to 
have been made after one inaccuracy than after two; and partly because the abandoned 
title reference to Alexander is retained in the headline of the other two. It is possible 
to add to these arguments the evidence of the variant readings of the texts. The follow- 
ing table of the more significant includes the fourth edition, printed 1591, which, as 
will be apparent, was printed directly from the first editionft. 

FIRST SECOND THIRD FOURTH 
(Present) (BM. and Bodl.) (Dyce) (1591) 
1, det Ti, 2 328 raysed rased raced rased 
2, Ae Vii, 1.18 luke warme luke warme lucke warme luke warme 
3. Act Lii, 1.79 graue greue greue graue 
4. Act Lili, 2-79 be be by be 
$5. det MIL iii, J. 10 Toue loue loue Toue 
6. det UL iv, 15 tired tried tried tyred 
7. Act WL iv, h 71 proportion proportion proposition proportion 
8. Act IV ii, J. 2 thy thy the thy 
9. Act IV iti, 1.8 to do do to 
10, Act Vi, 1. 28 signes signes signes singes 

In this table the readings found in the first edition are the correct ones except for 
the tenth. In the second and third editions these readings have become progressively 
corrupt, while in the 1591 which was printed directly from the first, these particular 
readings were all restored to their original form except for the tenth which in that 
edition is correctly rendered for the first time. According to Bond, the British Museum 
edition was printed from the Dyce because it contains ‘2 bad corruptions’, viz. Act I 
sc. i, 1.5 ‘thurst’ for ‘thrust’, and Act III sc. v, 1.28 ‘pararamour’ for ‘paramour’, which 
are not found in the other editions. Were this all the evidence which could be adduced 
regarding this point one would be inclined to accept his conclusion. But an examination 
of the table given above shows that if the B.M. edition was printed from the Dyce then 
the first, second, fourth, seventh, and eighth readings must have been corrected either 
by a comparison with the first edition or by a rather astute or lucky proof-reader. 
Moreover, if one compares the variant readings of these editions in those instances 
where it is not so much a question of correctness of meaning as one of optional spellingta 
there can be little doubt that the B.M. edition was printed from the first, and the Dyce 

HeThis accoiunts for the reversion to the date of Court performance used in the first edition but not for the 
‘omission of ‘Alexander’ and ‘Diogenes’ from the title. The only reasonable explanation of this circum- 
stance is that by 1591 this comedy had become known by the name of ‘Campaspe’, certainly later on it 
was referred to by that name in the Stationers’ Register, 
§The line-numbering is Bond’s, 

ta PRESENT B.M, and BODLEIAN DYCE 
Act Li, 1.65, Chyeronie Chyeronie Chyronie 
Act Vii, Lt Whats Whats Whatis 
At ML ii, L. 38 ouertwhartes ouertwhartes ouerwhartes 
Act Wy, 14 yt y* that 

[ 656 |

edition from the B.M. According to this hypothesis, Bond’s ‘bad corruptions’ in the 
B.M. edition were so ‘bad’ that even the compositor of the Dyce edition detected them. 
Curiously enough, more copies of this first edition are known than of either of the 
other two although the various editors of this play, Reed excepted, have never been 
able to examine it. Five copies can now be traced, viz. the perfect copy at Dulwich 
College which somehow escaped Garrick, the Huntington (Huth), the Harvard (Locker- 
White), the J.K.Lilly (Bridgewater-Huntington-Jones-Clawson), and the present. 

S.T.C. 17048b. Huntinoton C.L., 267. CLawson Car., 174 (tp. facs.). Locker Car. (1886) 
67. W.A.Warre Cat., 83. Hazurrr, 360. Hur Car. III, 881.