ELIZABETH,  Queen  oF ENGLAND. 
         L.S. 
         2 MAY 1574 
         GREENWICH 

    MS.18 

                Description:    Foolscap  folio, 2 leaves, pp.2-3 blank, text 34 page, folded three times, seal, slit 
                for ribbon. 

             Appress,  p.4: To of trufty and welbilouid mf doctor Dale our Ambaffado' refident in 
             fraunce. 

             Transcript:   Elizabeth R [sign manual] By the Quene. 
             Trufty and  welbelouid we grete you well. Letting you tunderftand that we haue feen 
             your advertifements  written the xxijt® of the laft moneth ynto our Secretarys', and 
             do very well allowe and like of the fpeches you had wth Quene Moth", howbeit we wold 
             haue wifhed  that the matter you wrote of in ciphre had ben [‘fett’, superior, in another 
             hand]  out more  fully and at large. And therefor wold haue youe herafter, when you 
             fhall haue occafion to writt of matters of weight and importance, to fett them furth 
             more  fully and particulerly. And wheras we haue thought good to fend our trufty is 
             welbilouid feruaunt Thomas   Layton Capteyn  of our Ifle of Garnfey this bearar, thith’ 
              to vifit in of behalf our good broth" the king there, and haue willed to participat vnto 
              youe his charge and Inftructions®, and fo to conferr togithers [sic] therof; we requier 

           VOL.UI                         [ 1197 J

youe to affift him wth your aduife and cunfell for the better executing of his fayd 
                          charge, and likewife procure him audience and accompany  him  to the Court at the 
                          tyme  of his acces appointed. Geven vnder of Signet at our Manour of Grenew‘h the 
                          fecond day of May  1574 the xvjt' yere of of reign®. 

                               Nores:  1 These letters are calendared in State Papers, Foreign Series (1572-4) Nos.1394-1397. 
                                 2 Copies of the instructions given to Thomas Leighton, Governor  of Guernsey,  are preserved 
                                   in the State Papers, op. cit. No.1404. 
                                 3 For  Dr. Dale’s replies see op. cit. Nos.1414-1419.