MS.35J   EVELYN,     Joun  to Sir Robert  Southwell.’ 
              A.L.S. 
              5 MARCH   1698 
              WOTTON 
              Description: Paper, 2 leaves, quarto, pp-3-4 blank, Hinged at p.424 of The Miscellany Writings 
              of Fohn Evelyn 1825. 

                                                                            well be a copy kept at Wotton and 
                                                                             | letter sent, it may well have been 
                                                                                Cat. Pt.IV,1834), though we do 

                PRoveNANcE:   As this letter has no address nor seal it may 
                therefore with provenance as MS.354. But if this is the actual 
                among  the Southwell MSS.  bought by Thorpe  in 1834 (Thorpe 

            VOL.MI                         [ 1227 ]

not find it listed in the six hundred-odd pages of that catalogue. The Southwell MSS. after 
                                passing through the hands of Sir Thomas Phillips are now mainly in the British Museum, 

                             TRANSCRIPT:                                                 Wotton   Mar: 5 —97% 
                             sé Iam   asham’d the Trifle? I lately fent you, should cost you the paine you tell me 
                             you are in, for Words to Thank  me;  who  owe you  double Acknowledgm®    for the 
                             honour you do me  in accepting it: I wish it caryed any proportion to the favour you 
                             are pleaf’d to shew it; fince befides the greate Reguard due to S? Rob! Southwell; the 
                             Character he has born as our Prefident (and still Adornes as its Reprefentative), gives 
                            him just Title to the Noblest Productions of the Society; But his Comity & Condefcen- 
                             tion onely, to Encourage and Accept the meanest of them— 
                               Concerning ¥  Inquiry about ¥ Parfly, our Coloni here know nothing of it; and not 
                             hauing M'  Woodings Systema  by me, I cannot tell what parfly he may meane, there 
                             being fo many  Species of that plant: If it be the Coton Petrofe linum we vfe in the 
                             Kitchin, & plant in the Garden; you know  ’tis propugated by the feede; Sown in ¥ 
                             Spring, & in good mould; That  tis fom what longer in coming vp, than most  other 
                             Olitorys are, & therefore best imbib’d before femination; That if it efcape very hard 
                             winters without covering; it will last 3 or 4 yeares, efpecially, if often cutt, which 
                             revives, & caufes it to fpring a fresh, which haply the clofe & greedy bite of fheepe, may 
                             fupply instead of the Gardiners knife: If this I fay, be it he meanes, I belieue the warme 
                             & neglected corners of Pasture fields, might not refufe it; but how it would fpeede vpon 
                             higher fheepdownes, & larger grounds (fince in hot weather it requires refreshing, & in 
                             very Cold fome fhelter) I can not tell. Is there not a Mountaine Parfly naturaly growing 
                             aboue St Vincents Rock, neere y delicious feate? Alefanders beares the name of Apium 
                             Montanus,  & the Canealis, & wild Danens are of the Tribe, & grow common among our 
                             sheepe-walks; but whether they do Eate of it, I indeede do not know: Our fhepherds in 
                             this Country are willing to let Genista (common Broome) grow in fome places of their 
                             fheepe-pastures, affirming that it preferves them from the Rot.—S; I am forry I can 

                             furnish you fo little, vpon this Rural Article from my owne, or others Experiences, who 
                             remaine  S} 
                                       >                     Your  most humble 

                                                                & obedient Servant 
                                                                  I Euelyn 
                              S} I befeech you to p'fent my moft humble fervice to M! Hill, who with his Obliging 
                              Lett! convey’d me yours: Be pleafd to tell him I would gladly know, whether he haue 
                              met with any Coine or Medal  with the Bipennis Tenedia on it, befides that publish’d 
                              by Mi  Groves in his Denarius &c 

                                As for CONOB,  most frequently taken to be Constantinopoli Oblignata; 1 thinke they 
                              reade it better, Constantinus o’Bastht’. 

                                 Nores:  1 From  interna] evidence this letter appears to be in answer to a letter from Southwell 

                                       enclosed in one from  Abraham   Hill of 26 February  1697[8], first printed in Diary and 
                                       Correspondence 111,1854,p.367. 

                                   2 The ‘Trifle’ appears to have been a copy of Evelyn’s Numismata 1697. 

                                                         [ 1228 ]



Proor  serore Lerrers or Rosert Nanreur. Encravine or Joun Evetyn 
                                    Evelyn refers to his picture in MS. 35x