430 

GREENE, Roserr. 
GREENES | Neuer too Late. | BOTH PARTES. | Sent to all youthfull 

GENTLEMEN, | defciphering in a true Englifh Hiftorie, thofe | partic- 
ular vanities, that with their Froftie va- | pours, nip the bloffomes of euery 

VOL.II [419 ]

braine, | from attaining to his intended | perfection. | As pleafant as profit- 
able, being a right Pumice ftone, | apt to race out idleneffe with delight, and | 
folly with admonition. | By ROBERT GREENE, In artibus | Magifter. | 
Omne tulit punctum. | [publisher’s device, McK.n.376] | LONDON, | 
Printed by William Stansby for Iohn Smithwicke, and are to bee | fold at 
his Shop in Saint Dunftanes Churchyard in Fleete- | {{treete vnder the 

Diall. 1616.) 
SEVENTH EDITION. Quarto, Black Letter. 
Coutation: A-Qt; 64 leaves. 

Contents: title, recto [A]; verso blank; dedi- man, signed ‘Ralph Sidney.'t, recto A3; another 
cation to Tho. Barnaby, in roman, signed ‘Rob- signed ‘Rich. Hake Gent.’, verso A3; text, recto 
ert Greene.’, recto A2; To the Gentlemen Read- [Ag]-verso [Q4]. 
ers, in roman, verso A2; A Madrigall, in ro- 

Polished calf, lettered lengthwise on spine, by Pratt. 676 x 474 inches. The Alexander Young 
(1890, Lot 354) —Henkels Miscellany (26 June 1919, Lot 166) — Clawson (I, 1926, Lot 333) copy 
with Young’s bookplate but not Clawson’s. The last line of title is cut off, see below. 

‘Tar: bibliographical records regarding all the early editions of this book are confused 
because of the rarity of some and the imperfect condition of others. Of the first edition, 
1590, only two copiest, both imperfect, are known; of the second, with imprint reading 
‘T.Orwin for N.Ling, 1600’, the Dalrymple-Folger copy appears to be unique. Two 
copiesit of the third edition, ‘J.Roberts for N.Ling, 1600” are recorded; while of the 
fourth edition, ‘for N.Ling, 1602, the Folger (Sotheby’s 16 April 1930) is the only copy 
traceable. Two copies§ of the fifth edition, 1607, can be located; and one, the Dyce, of 
the sixth, 1611. Of the present seventh, 1616, eight copies are recorded. The edition 
dated ‘1621’ is a ghost as all copies recorded of that date have their imprints cropped 
and belong either to the present or to some other known edition, The eighth is the 

‘This “Madrigall to wanton Louers’, here signed ‘Ralph Sidney.’ i, in the eatlier editions, signed ‘Ralph 
Sidley.’. The alteration is probably a printer’s error. 
{The British Museum; Huntington (Christ Church-Lyte-Britwell), 
HiThe Sion College; Bodleian (Malone). 
§The British Museum (North-Heber); Huntington (W.A. White). 
taFor census, see below. Most of these, like the present copy, have not been recognized as belonging to this 
edition because the title was set-up larger than the text~674 inches as against 634—and consequently 
copies have usually had the last line of the imprint cut off. The Tite copy in the British Museum has the 
‘op line of the title cut into instead of the imprint. While printing the title, Stansby evidently realized 
that he was using too large a scale for he tried to rectify it by omitting, after the fourth ine of the present, 
3 Passage, ‘to roote out the infectious follies, that over-reaching conceits foster in the spring time of their 
youth’, which appears in the earlier editions, 

[ 420 ]

only undated edition (?date) published by Smethwicke without printer's name. Three 
copies are knownta. The ninth edition, 1631, is known by only two copiestta. 
It is not possible to explain why Ling and Busby did not enter this book in the Sta- 
tioners’ Register since in the same year, 1590, that the first edition of this work was 
published, they entered and published Lodge’s Rosalynde and later, 19th November 
1607, Ling transferred his rights in both the present and the Rosalynde to Smethwicke. 
One would naturally suppose that every precaution would be taken to protect the 
copyrights of so popular an author as Greene. 
A full account of this work is given in Haslewood’s Censura Literaria 11,271, as well 
as by Corser. This much, however, may be said, that from a note appended to the first 
part it appears that this book was written and at least intended to be issued before the 
Farewell to Folly which was entered in 1587, though the earliest edition extant is dated 
1591. 
Seven other copies of this edition have been located, viz. the British Museum (Tite; 
Wright-George III, both titles mutilated), Bodleian (Douce, title lacking), Capell (title 
mutilated), Harvard (Jolley-Locker-White, title mutilated), Huntington, and the H.B. 
Forman (title mutilated) copy now owned by the Rosenbach Company. 

taThe two variously dated British Museum copies (S.T.C. 12256a and 12257) are identical. This edition 
contains blocks at one time Valentine Simmes’s. We have not examined the Harvard (White) fragment. 
flaThe Huntington (Chew); Folger (Freeling-Huth). 

S.T.C. 12256, ARBER IIT. 365. Huwrinoron C.L., 184. Grea Capell Cat., 52.