App.9 

PIL TO PURGE MELANCHOLIE. 
[Row of type-ornament] | A PIL | To purge Melancholie: | OR, | A 
PREPRATIVE [sic] TO A | PVRGATION: | or, | Topping, Copping, 
and Capping: | take either or whether: | or, | Mafh them, and fquafh 
them, and dafh | them, and diddle come derrie come | daw them, all 
together. | [row of type-ornament] | [London, by William White, 1599] 

  

First EDITION. Quarto. Black Letter. 

#The black letter type here used originally belonged to Abel Jeffes and occurs in many of his productions. 
The floriated initial I on recto Aj and the factotum on recto Aq occur in Alexander Craig’s The amorose 
songes, sonets and elegies printed by William White, 1606, They may well also have come from Jeffes whose 

materials White acquired when they were seized in 1595. The manner of signing used in this book is 
White's. 

[ xxxiv ]

Couzation: A-B4; 8 leaves. 

Contents: title, recto [A]; verses, In laudem _ blank; letter, signed ‘Snuffe.’, Sig A3; reply, 
implaudim, in roman, verso [A]; dedication to signed ‘Snipfnap.’, recto Aq; text, verso Aq- 
M.Bavv-vvavy, in roman, recto [A2]; verso recto [Bg]; postscript, verso [Ba]. 

Olive brown morocco, extra, 734 x 5% inches. The Alexander Dalrymple (1809) — Heber (VI, 
1835, Lot 2808) —Lowther Castle (1937, Lot 383) copyt. 

Tuts ‘epithetical medley’ was supposed by Joseph Haslewood (British Bibliographer I, 
1810; pp-149-152) to be addressed to Thomas Nashe. The evidence which Haslewood 
marshalled is not conclusive although there is reason to believe that Nashe was some- 
how or other concerned in this publication. What the nature of the quarrel was, whether 
other publications connected with it were published, and the identity of the railing 
vituperator who composed this ‘Pil’ are still problems which have not been solved. 
The book is dedicated to ‘Maifter Baw-waw’ whom Haslewood believed to be Nashe 
himself on the grounds that he used the name in his Lenten stuffe (q.v.] in a manner 
which Haslewood believed was intended to refer to himself but which Dr. McKerrow 
regards as merely a proverbial expression. The dedicator, who signs himself ‘Yours his 
blue vaine’, declares that ‘mooued through affection, as alfo hearing of your arriuall 
into England, I haue made bolde to dedicate this my fimple labor vnto you. . . ’. 
The phrase in Nashe’s Lenten stuffe ‘after my returne from Ireland’, which Sir Sidney 
Lee regarded as an announcement that Nashe was about to go there and Fleay that 
he had been there serving in the war, is interpreted by Dr. McKerrow as an imaginary 
speech of the ‘Brauamente segniors’ and not Thomas Nashe. In Dr. McKerrow’s judg- 
ment, therefore, Baw-waw is unlikely to be Nashe. 
There are, however; other references in the book which indicate some relationship 
to Nashe and his coterie, e.g.: “Herringcobs inuentions’tt, 1.15, recto A3; ‘Lenton 
relictes’, 19, recto Aq; and possibly ‘becaufe fhe thought that a red Hearring was not 
a difh daintie enough to feaft fo royall a gueft as a Commaunder’, II.3-5, verso [Ba]. 
The date of the present pamphlet may perhaps be established as sometime early in 
1599. Nashe’s Lenton stuffe was entered 11 January of that year, though written in 
1598, and was presumably published soon after because, 1 June 1599, ‘all Nasshes 
bookes and Doctor Harvyes bookes [were ordered to] be taken wheresoeuer they maye 
be found and that none of theire bookes bee euer printed hereafter’ (Arber III, 677). 
If much of the edition of the Lenten stuffe then remained unsold it would presumably 

tAccording to Lowndes (IV, 186s, p.1867) a copy of this book was sold at Sotheby’s in 1860. We have not 
been able to trace the sale but that copy was probably the present one for no other copy is known. 
ttAbout this time there seems to have been an inexplicable interest in herrings for, besides Nashe’s Lenten 
stuffe 1599, the text of which is headed “The praise of the red herring’, there is Richard Carew’s 4 herring’s 
tayle 1598 which might in its obscurities have some relation to the present, and the translation of Jan van 
Doetecum’s tract, 4 most strange and wonderful herring taken neere Drenton 1598, which is one of the 
numerous class announcing the discovery of mysteriously marked fish and certainly has no relation to 

the present work. 

[ xxxv ]

have been seized and recorded among the books destroyed at that time, and the book 
would presumably be much rarer than it now is. In the postscript of the present, 
1l.24-7, verso [Ba], the author suggests ‘that Chollericke Pill of hers will eafely be 
digefted with one pleafant conceit or other of Mounfier de Kempe [William Kempe, 
the comedian] on Monday next at the Globe, where I would gladly meete you, if your 
leyfure will fo permit’. Now Kempe was not playing in London from the first Monday 
in Lent, 8 March 1599, when he left on his jigging tour to Norwich, until September 
1601, when he returned and joined Worcester’s company. If it may be admitted that 
the phrases ‘Lenton relictes’, etc. refer to Nashe’s book, then the publication date of 
the present volume was sometime during the first three months of 1599. 
Although the identity of the railers who participated in this controversy cannot be 
established, the text itself is not so obscure that, taking it at its face value, some sort 
of outline of the contents of the present tract may not be sketched. After the dedica- 
tion is a letter signed ‘She that skornes thee and thy puffie ftuffe: Snuffe.’ which 
threatens that if the ‘rubbifh and outcaft of your Herringcobs inuentions’ should be 
printed ‘I will fo caftice thee inflicting difmall corafiues vpon thy fainting foule . . . ’ 
Then follows an answer signed ‘He that loues thee and thy fnuffie ftuffe, Snipfnap.’, 
which states that ‘I do perfeueere in my {curuie louzie meaning, to beray & betray the 
world with my flattring Papers like fixe pennie gigges, and to haue them printed’. He 
also states that he has received Snuffe’s letter ‘which I haue anfwered with a crowding 
fpirit’. This answer then follows and forms the major section of the book, eight pages. 
It consists of a long string of, mostly alliterative, abuse. At the end is a postscript 
which is apparently addressed to Snuffe and her sister and which shows the artificiality 
of this quarrel. 
No other copy of this book can be traced and the location of the present copy was 
unknown to Dr. McKerrow when he was editing The Works of Thomas Nashe. Its 
rarity may perhaps be due to the circumstance that it was privately printed, as indi- 
cated by the omission of imprint, and that very few copies were ever issued. The clue 
to the problems which it raises may still exist and, until they are solved, this book must 
remain an interesting, though baffling, puzzle.