[ 970 ]

943 SKELTON,     [Jouy]. 
           Here  at- | ter foloweth a litle | booke, of Phillyp | Sparotv, compi- | led by 
           Maptter   | Skeltd Poete | Laureate. | + |:       | &  | [in four pieces, 
            the side ones of three sections, each four blossoms on long stems; the top 
            and bottom, conventional, white on black ground] 

                CoxopHon:   28) Imprpnted  at London in paules | churche perde bp [William Copland for] Robert 
               Gop.  [e.1553] | 

               On  verso [D8], a woodcut of ‘Pbillyptparowes | tombe, |’ which had been used in the Kele edition. 
                SECOND  EXTANT  EDITION; Toy colophon. Octavo. Black Letter. 
                CoLLaTion:  A-D8; 32 leaves. 

                 ConTeEnTs:  title, recto [A]; verso blank; text, recto A2-recto [D8]; colophon, recto [D8]; woodcut, 
                 verso [D8]. 

                Red straight-grain morocco, gilt and blind-tooled, by Kalthoeberf. 54 x 334 inches. The 
               Steevens  (1800, Lot 1078)—B.A.P.   (1815, No.686)—Heber  (IV, 1834, Lot  2364) — Britwell 
                (1922, Lot 615) copy. When in the Stevens collection this book was bound with three other 
               works  by Skelton, viz. the Wight editions of Colin Clout and Way come ye not to court, and the 
                King edition of the Certayne bokes. These are now in the Huntington Library. 

               Tuts edition is known  by only two  copies—the present and  the Bright copy in the 
               British Museum.   The latter differs from the present in the colophon which reads: 
               <2  Smprpnted at London in paules | ehurche perde by Zohn wpabt ft 
                 The ornamental  blocks as well as the type (Isaac-Copland Textura 95) indicate that 
               this edition was printed neither by Toy nor Wight but by William Copland for them. 
               The state of the blocks used on the title shows that this edition was printed before the 
               1554 edition of the Four Sons of Aymon, and, since the earliest date at which Wight is 
               known  to have been at work  is 1551, its production may be definitely limited to that 
               period of three or four years. 
                 Regarding  the possibility of an edition printed by Thomas Godfray see Kele’s Colin 
               Clout. The Kele edition of Philip Sparrow, printed by Middleton, precedes the present 
               and the  Kitson-Veale-Walley edition, printed by John Day  (for the Walley issue see 
               next number)  follows it. 
                 Toy  and  Wight published  an edition of Why come ye not to court which is uniform 
               with the present in format, type, even to the same blocks on the title, and was appar- 
               ently printed at very nearly the same time. Bound  with various combinations of the 

                   tAccording  to the Sotheby cataloguers this was by Roger Payne but it was not separately bound until after 
                      Payne’s death, The  tools used are found in books bearing Kalthoeber’s ticket. 

          VOL.                      [971]

issues of these two books, presumably at an early date, are found copies of an edition 
                             of Colin Clout printed for Wight and Marshe}. That edition, though uniform in size, 
                             type, and partly on paper of the same watermark, with the other two books, has the 
                             title within McKerrow and Ferguson Compartment   No.17, and  therefore superficially, 
                             at any rate, does not have the appearance of having been  originally intended to be 
                             issued with the others. If one could assume that copies of all the issues of all the edi- 
                             tions printed are extant some excuse for delay in printing the Colin Clout might be 
                             found in the fact that of the three books it is the only one preceded by an edition other 
                             than that of Kele [c.1545]tt. Following that reasoning, one would then be lead to the 
                             conclusion that the Wight and Marshe edition of the Colin Clout was printed after the 
                             death of Toy, early in 1556, when Marshe became  associated with Wight in the place 
                             left by Toy. However, though the internal evidence of the state of the title-compart- 
                             ment appears to support such a date, it must be recalled that at least one issue of each 
                             of the three editions is known by only one copy and that, therefore, it is entirely possi- 
                             ble, granted that they were all printed in 1554-5, that Marshe was associated with Toy 
                             and Wight  in printing all three of the books. 
                               Philip Sparrow is deservedly the most popular of all Skelton’s poems. It is a burlesque 
                             lamentation, full of teasing magniloquence with the alliteration and the other Skeltoni- 
                             cal traits quite under control, for the death of a bird which belonged to Jane Scrope a 
                             pupil of the Black Nuns  at Carrow, near  Norwich. Though   the topic is similar to 
                             Catullus’s dirge for Lesbia’s sparrow, it owes less to that famous poem than to the 
                             mock  encomnia which were  the delight of Renaissance scholars of whom Skelton was 
                             one of the earliest in England, being celebrated by Erasmus in his De Laudibus Britan- 
                             niae as ‘unum Britannicarum literarum lumen  ac decus’. 

                                  }The only copy of the Marshe issue which can be traced is in Wadham College, Oxford. 
                                  ttViz. the octavo edition printed by Thomas Godfray about 1530, the only known copy of which is at 
                                    Woburn  Abbey. 

                                  S.T.C. [22595a].