80: 

                     PLUTARCH     (s0?-120?). 
                      THE  LIVES  | OF THE  NOBLE    GRE-  | CIANS  AND   ROMANES, 
                      COMPARED  |  together by that graue learned Philofopher and Historiogra- | 
                     pher, Plutarke of Charonea: | Tranflated out of Greeke into French by 
                      IAMES  AMYOT,   Abbot of Bellozane, | Bishop of Auxerre, one of the 
                      Kings priuy counfel, and great Amner | of Fraunce, and out of French 
                     into Englishe, by | Thomas North. | [printer’s device, McK.n.170] | 
                      Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier | and [for] Iohn VVight. | 
                      1579. | 

                              ConopHon:   [printer’s device, McK.n.179a] | Imprinted at London  by  Thomas   Vautrollier, 
                              dyvelling in | the Blacke Friers by Ludgate. | 

                                Woodcuts,  at the beginning of each ‘life’, medallion portrait of the respective subject, in orna- 

                               mental  border. These are said to be close copies of the blocks used in the French editions of 
                               Amyot. 

                               First epirion; Wight  imprint. Translated by Sir Thomas  North. Folio in sixes. 
                               Contation:  #9; [-]!; A-sFS; sos leaves. (Sig FF? is signed EEa, and 4D2 is DDD2). 
                               Contents:   title, recto [+]; verso blank; dedi- Reader, dated   24  January    1579,  signed 

                               cation to Elizabeth, dated 16 Januaty  1579,   ‘thomas  North.’,  recto +3;   Amiot   to the 
                               signed  “Thomas   North’,  Sig 2;   To   the   Readers,  in italic, verso :3-recto  unsigned 

[ 824 ]

Brown  morocco,  extra, by Riviere. 1234 x 834 inches. Sig [ks] misplaced by the binder. The 
            Jones (1919, Lot 1307) copy  with bookplate. 

           Tuere  is another state of the imprint in which Wight’s name is omitted. 
             This justly celebrated translation was from Amyot’s  French and not  the original 
           Greek. It contains at the end two lives which are not Plutarch’s. They were written 
           for the Latin translation of Campani, 1470, and later translated into French by Charles 
          de  la Sluce (l’Ecluse), 1567, when the comparison of Simon  Goulard  Senlisien was 
          appended. 
             Since this translation forms the major source for the plots of Shakespeare’s classical 
          plays as well as suggestions for numerous passages in the non-Roman ones, it is of con- 
          siderable interest to Shakespearean scholars that the identity of the particular edition 
          used  by him  should be established. Since there were four editions published in the 
          dramatist’s lifetime, the problem is one which involves a large amount of collation. The 
          edition of 1612, the one selected by Skeat and Collier, although a copy of it said to have 
          been the poet’s property is now in the Greenock Library, may be ruled out as all of the 
          plays in question were written before that edition was published. 
             The case presented by F.A.Leo for the second edition, 1595, is more convincingf. In 
          fact, one might consider his case as proved were it not that some hints of 4 midsummer 
          night's dream are clearly derived from the Life of Theseus. As that play was written, at 
          the very latest, in 1594-5, Shakespeare must either have seen the proof-sheets of that 
          second edition at the shop of Richard Field, his fellow townsman and the printer of the 
          second, third and  fourth editions, or have used a copy of the present 1579 edition. 
          However,  it is entirely probable that Shakespeare used more than one edition. 
            It would be unaccountable  if books of this date and size were actually as rare as the 
          traceable examples of the present seem to indicate for the only other copies with the 
          present imprint  which  we have  traced are the British Museum,   Emanuel  College 
          Cambridge,  Turnbull Library Wellington  N.Z., Chapin, Owen D. Young (Sotheby’s 15 
          December   1930), Harmsworth  (Britwell), the J.Parker Norris now at the Rosenbach 
          Company,   and the two copies listed in Quaritch Cat. 436. Copies with the Vautrollier 
          imprint are as rare, eight can be located, viz. the Capell, Birmingham Public Library, 
         N.Q.  Pope-White-W.A.White    Jr., Folger, Huntington (Bridgewater), the Brownelowe 
          copy which has been  in and out of the London auction-houses several times in the last 
          six years, and a copy now in the possession of a New York bookseller. 

             {Four  Chapters of North's Plutarch, Berlin, 1878. 

           S.T.C, 20066,  ARBER  II. 351.  HunTINGTON   C.L., 314. SINKER  T.C.C. Cat. No.481. AMES 
           (Edit. by Herbert) I], 1071. Bartiett  Mr.7.S.  No.226.   GREG  Capel! Cat., 105. 

     VOLT                [ 825 ]