MS.10a 

CONGREVE, Wi.u1M to Josepu Katty’. 
A.L.S. 
17 DECEMBER 1710 
LONDON 

Notes: ‘Joseph Keally of Keally Mount, Kilkenny, a relative of Bishop Berkeley. 
[ 208 ]

Description: Paper, 2 leaves, quarto, 73% x 6 inches, p.3 blank, with seal. A fragment from 
another letter written to Keally by Congreve containing the address only is preserved?. 
Brvpinc: Limp yellow morocco, extra, by Sangorski and Sutcliffe. A portrait of Congreve by 
J.Fitler after J. Thurston is inlaid. 
Provenance: The Hagen (1918, Lot 282)-Clawson (1920, Lot 112) copy with Clawson book- 
plate. Bound for Clawson. On p.4 is the number 39 in an early hand which is the number of this 
letter in Berkeley’s Literary Relics, see note 9. 

ADDRESS, p.4: To Joseph Kelly Efqt in Dublin. 
Transcript: Dear Kelly 
Tu, ne cede malis, fed, contra, audentior ito. I told Ld Caftlecomer* M': Addifon & M™ 
Dopping® with whom I drank your health laft night that I would begin my letter to 
you like a Tatler with a latin fentence. The aplication of which I would leaue to your 
felfe. I fee Mein® feldom but if he would he could write you no news; for things happen 
like earthquakes fuddain unufual & unforefeen. M": Addifon, very well applyd a line 
out of Oedipus’ yefterday which will fheu you how things go here 
—one but began 
—To wonder, & ftrait fell a wonder too, 
I have fent to Harry Kelley to inform me by whom I may fend you my books and the 
print done by Smith® which is generally liked. I have fince I began this letter feen 
Mein. I fuppofe you will hear foon from him. all the neighborhood are much yrs. My 
fervice to Robin, Luther &c® 
I am Dear Kelly 
Ys WC 
London December 17.17101°.

2When sold in the Hagen and Clawson sales the fragment was described as an envelope. How- 
ever, this letter is folded, addressed, and sealed for posting without an envelope and, moreover, 
has a postmark upon it. Envelopes though known to the lexicographers at this date were not used 
in the mail as they were subject to additional charge as an extra sheet. 
3This quotation is from Virgil Aeneid V1.95 and may be translated ‘Do not yield to misfortune, 
but on the contrary become more bold’. 
4Christopher Wandesford, 2nd Viscount Castlecomer. 
5Samuel Dopping of Dopping Court, Dublin. 
®This mutual friend has not been identified. 
TApparently in conversation, as it does not occur in any Tafler of this date. 
8The well known mezzotint by John Smith after Kneller (J.Chaloner Smith British Mezzotinto 
Portraits 1884, No.s4). 
This letter, with some variation in spelling and pointing, was printed in George Monck 
Berkeley’s Literary Relics 1789 (reprinted 1792, pp.374-5) along with 42 other letters of Congreve 
to Keally. These letters provide the main source of information concerning Congreve’s life during 
the first decade of the eighteenth century. 
10The date given by Berkeley and repeated by Montague Summers, Bonamy Dobrée and 
John C. Hodges is 15 December 1710, in the MS., however, it is clearly 17 December. 

VOL.I [ 209 ]