ELIZABETH,  Queen or ENGLAND. 
         LS. 
         I FEBRUARY 1573 
         HAMPTON COURT 

    MS.17 

                Description:    Foolscap  folio, 2 leaves, text 134 pp., seal on p.4, folded three times, slit for ribbon. 

             Appress,  p.4: To our  trufty & welbelouid Docto" Dale, our Ambassadot  refident in 

              france 

             Transcript!:  Elizabeth R [sign manual] By the Quene. 
             Right trufty and  welbilouid we  grete you  well Wheras  the ffrench Ambaffado" 
             fithence the retourn of our fervaunt Randolph?, hath fundry tymes had acces vnto vs; 
             requiring our aunfwer wheder we  could allowe of the cumming over of the Duke of 

             Alancon, vppon  the vieu of his portrature brought over by our faid fervaunt, you fhall 
                                                  with the king and his Mother, fhew them, that 

             therfor at the tyme of your audience 
                                               hem  hath proceded vpon twoo refpects. Th’one, 

             the caufe of our ftaye in aunfwering t 

            VOL.1II                          [ 1195 ]

for that we haue had fundry conferences with our Counfel, to knowe  their opinions 
                           what Inconvenience might followe, if vppon a publicq and open enterveu, there fhuld 
                           not growe fatiffaction of our perfons: for that we woold be lothe that the king our good 
                           brother feking to enter in to ftraighter amitie with vs by this offre of mariage, there 
                           fhuld fall out fuch difcontentement by this occafion throug not fatiffaction, as might 
                           impaire the good amitie alredy betwene vs, and therfor we thought it a matter worthy 
                           of good deliberation: Th’other for that afwell vpon the difcoverey of a late entreprice 
                           intended againft thofe of Rochel, as other aduertifments from that Countree, there is 
                           conceved in the harts of our good fubiects a new Jaloufie and mifliking of this matche, 
                           and therfor we defiring nothing more then the confervation and continuance of their 
                           good devotion towards us, know  not what to refolue. Notwithftanding being preffed 
                           by their Ambafsadot to yeld our aunfwer, he receved the fame from  vs as followeth. 
                           We  fhewed him that wheras he vfsed diuers reafons to perfwade us to giue our confent 
                           to an open and publick entrevieu, we could in no cafe be led to yeld therto: for that we 
                           can be putt in no comfort by thofe that defier mooft our Mariage and ar well affected 
                           to that Crown who haue alfo feen the yong gentleman, that there will growe any fatif- 
                           faction of our perfons And therfor you may faye, that if it wer not more to fatiffie the 
                           earneft requeft of our good broth the king and the Quene his mother, (whofe honnor- 
                           able dealinges towards vs afwell in feking vs himfelf, as in offring vnto vs both his 
                           brethern, we cannot but efteme  as an infallible argument of their great good willes 
                           towards vs) we could in no cafe be induced to allowe of his cumming neith’ publickly 
                           nor priuatly, for that we feare (notwithf{tanding the great proteftations that he and 
                           his mother make  to the contrary) that if vppon the entervieu fatiffaction follow not, 
                           there is like to enfue thereby inftede of f{traighter amitie, diftayn, vnkindnes, and a 
                           gawll and wound of that good freendfhipp that is alredy betwen vs. The doubt wherof, 
                           maketh  vs very much perplexed to yeld to a thing that we in our own conceit greatly 
                           feare will not haue that good fucces and iffue that of eith’ partie is defired. 
                           Notwithftanding  if you fhall fee that the doutes that we laye before them, fhall not 
                           ftaye them but that Monf*  le Duke  will nedes cum over in fum difguifed fort; that 
                           then you fhall tell the king from vs, that we defier that the gentleman in whofe com- 
                           pany he fhall cum over (as one of his followers) may be one not of fo great qualite as 
                           the Duke  of Montmorency’,  nor accompanyed   with any great trayne, to avoyd  the 
                           fufpicion that otherwife wilbe of his cumming, for that if there followe no liking betwene 
                           vs after a viue taken the one of the other, the more fecretly it be handled, the lefs 
                           touch will it be to both our honours. We ar of late earneftly requefted b[y] a doughter* 
                           of the Duke of Monpenfiers, who  is prefently in houfe with the Electo™ Palatyne in 
                           Germanye,  to recomend her reafonable requeft vnto the king our good brother and to 
                           Quene  Moth'. Which is, that fhe may enioye by benifit of the Edict fuch her liuing as 
                           fhe hath in fraunce, during the tyme of her abfence, being withdrawen from thence in 
                           refpect of the liberte of her confcience. You fhall therefor faye vnto Quene Mother 
                           from vs that we defier her to joyn with youe in the furtherance of this fute vnto. the 
                           king her Sonne our good brother, who, we hope afwell for our fakes as that the gentle- 

                                     [ 1196 ]

woman   is fo nere of blood vnto her childern, and that it is a naturall vertu incident to 
            our fexe to be pitifull of thofe that ar afflicted; will fo tender her cafe as by her good 
            meanes  the gentlewoman   fhalbe relieved. and we gratified, which we fhalbe redy to 
            requite as occafion fhall ferve us Geuen vnder our Signet at our honour of hampton- 
            court the firft daye of february 1573. the xvj'" yere of our reign®, 

              Nores:  1 A copy of this letter, together with various drafts of it by Burghley and Leicester are 
                  preserved among   the State Papers, Foreign Series (1572-4) Nos.1309-1312, and also Hatfield 
                  Papers  Il, 69. 
                2 The  ‘inward, secret, and principal cause’ of his mission was to obtain a portrait of the duc 
                  d’Alencon  and  to compare  it with the original, see op. cit. Nos.1206-8 (a full transcript is 
                  among   the Hardwicke  papers in N.Y.P.L.). 
                 3 Francis, duc de Montmorency,   was  in England on an embassy  in 1572 and so escaped the 
                   Massacre of Saint Bartholomew. 
                 4 Charlotte de Bourbon,  daughter of Louis IT de Bourbon, due de Montpensier, in 1571 took 
                  refuge with Frederick  III, Elector Palatine. She there was converted to Calvinism and later 
                  married  William  the Silent, Prince of Orange. 
                 5 Dr. Dale’s replies to this letter are calendared, op. cif. Nos.1320-1323.