510 

HOWARD, Henry EArt oF suRREY—Translator 
Vircitius Maro, Pusiivs (70-19 B.c.). 
The fourth | boke of Uirgill, intreating | of the loue bettwene Aeneas a | Dido, 
tranflated into Englith, and | dratune into a ftratige metre | by Wenrpe late 

VOL.IL [515]

Earle of | Surrey, worthy to be | embraced. | (.°.) | € Imprinted at London | 
bp John Bap, for William | Awen, divellyng in Pater | nofter rote, at the | 
{pqne of the | Cocke. [15542] |s@- | Cum priuilegioad im- | primendum folum. | 
[in compartment of five odd piecest] 

  

First eprrion. Quarto. Black Letter. 

   

Cottation: [-}4; B-D4; E2; 18 leaves. 
Contents: title, see Plate No. XVII, recto first Owen.’, second leaf; The occasion, third leaf; 
unsigned leaf; verso blank; dedication to text, recto fourth leaf-recto [E2}; blank, verso 
‘Thomas Duke of Norfolk, signed ‘Wyllyam [Ea]. 

Blue straight-grain morocco, extra, by Bedford. 634 x 434 inches. In purple morocco box-case. 
‘An inkstain has been removed from title leaving the left side of that page somewhat faint, see 
memorandum in Plate No.XVII. Sold at anonymous sale, Sotheby's 27 April 1858, Lot 596. The 
Britwell (1922, Lot 687) copy. 

Tue date of this book may be determined by the following. First, the dedicatee came 
into the title by which he is addressed the 25th August 1554. Second, the type used 
by Day in the dedication is otherwise known to have been used by him, according to 
Colonel Isaac, only in two books both printed in 1553-4. Third, Day was committed 
to the Tower the 16th October 1554, and is not known to have printed again in Marian 
times. Furthermore, this volume was printed during the few weeks noted above, or 
Owen must have been a very ignorant bookseller, for in his dedication he indicates that 
he believed he was not only publishing this translation for the first time but that it was 
Surrey’s first production to be printed}. 
This present unique volume, if we may consider this date established, contains the 
earliest printed English blank verse now known. It also, as Professor Hartman has ably 
demonstrated in the introduction to the facsimile edition edited by him and privately 
printed for Mr. Pforzheimer in 1933, contains: ‘the most nearly authentic’ text of 
Surrey’s translation which has been preserved. It may therefore be looked upon as the 
very germ or cornerstone of English Renaissance poetry and few volumes in the whole 

Two are conventional border pieces traceable in Day's books; while three are copied by ‘IC’ (query Jean 
Croissant) from a series of Creation cuts used in Horae printed by Pigouchet, Morand and possibly others, 
see Claudin Histoire 1, pp.at and 24, The English copies by IC cannot be traced in any other of Day's 
productions but they were used by Thomas Harper as late as 1641, However the artist who signed his 
work ‘IC’ (sometimes with graver between or the ‘I’ within the ‘C’) engraved the first series of borders, 

the scenes from the life of Christ, in John Day's Christian Prayers 156g, as well as cuts in Day's edition 
of Cuningham's Cosmographical Glasse 1559. 

  

Max Rooses (Chr. Plantin 1882, p.26s) attributes the work usually assigned to Croissant to either 
Gerard Jansen de Kampen or to Corneille Muller. 

Totes text of this translation was published 21st June 1557 (Certain Bokes II and IV) and the first edition 
of the Songes and Sonettes was published sth June of the same year. 

[516]





record of English literature so completely combine intrinsic primacy with physical 
uniqueness. Except for the descriptions made by the Sotheby cataloguers, apparently no 
bibliographer hitherto has had an opportunity of describing this book with the volume 
before him. 

Aes (Edit. Herbert) I, 679. Lownpes V, 2782, Hazurr, 631.