MS.104 

                        NORRIS,  Sir Joun (1547?-1597) to Sir Francis Walsingham. 
                        A.L.S. 
                        28 JULY 1587 
                        LONDON 

                                     Description:   Paper  with watermark   (Briquet 7210), folio, 2 leaves, p.3 blank, slit for ribbon, 
                                     traces of seal. Tytler Raleigh I fol.54. 

                              Appress, p.4: To the Ryght Honerable S" Fraunces Walfingham  her Ma:  Princypall 
                              Secretary in Courte. 

                               Transcript:   For Aunfwer of your Honers  letter receued thys day after twelue of the 
                               clock yt wyll pleafe you to be aduertifed that for the perticuler order and courfe bothe 

                                                       [ 1244 ]

in acquaintynge my  L: of Lefter, and fendinge the letter (rather then a cartell) whych 
            he wrote to the Count Holloc!: I muft refere your Honer to my Brothers? own report, 
            thys is as much as I can fay of yt, that not longe before my L: of Lefters departure, my 
            Brother dyd  communicate wyth me  hys intent to chalenge the Count Hollocs promyfe 
            to Awnfwer  hym  in the field after hys comynge from the campe, and after fome con- 
            ferens of the matter we concurred both in opinion that yt was fytt to acquaynt my L: 
            of Lefter, wyth yt fyrft; whych my  Brothe" undertooke to doe, and not longe after 
            delyuered me  my  L: of Lefters Aunfwer that hys L: fawe no reafon but that he myght 
            lawfully doe yt, and the rather bycaufe the Count Holloc had refufed to be hys Lyue- 
             tenant Generall; and that hys L: would affift hym in any thynge that fhould be for 
             the maintenans of hys reputation: Wheropon my  Brother proceded to the fendinge of 
             the letter: Complaint beynge made to my  L: and the Counfell; of the matter, my L: 
             fent for me and tould me howe the Counfell dyd vehemently vrge the matter agaynfte 
             my  Brother, but that yt was no  matter, and that my Brother fhould fett down in 
             wrytinge fuch reafons for the doynge of yt, as he had delyuered to hym; whych my 
             Brother dyd, and my  L: caufed to be redde to the Counfell and feemed fatiffyed wyth 
             yt: yt wylbe very hard  for me to veryfy vpon oth euery pertyculer warde, but the 
             fubftans I wyll maintane; and yt may  be yf I were wyth my Brother he could make 
             me  remember  fome  more pertycularity: for all thys I wyll affure your Honer that I 
             dyd always, both to the states; the Counfell, and the Count Holloc, confydently denye 
             that my L: Knew  not of yt; becaufe they fhould not for thys matter haue any aduaunt- 
             age againft hys L: and thys beynge all that at thys tyme I remember’, I humbly take 
             my  leaue Befechynge your Honer  not to forghett my troblefome eftate: London thys 
             xxviii July 1587 your Honers affuredly to Comaund 
                                             [Signed] J. Norreys. 

               Nores: 1 Count  Hohenlohe. 
                 2 Mr. Edward  Norris. 
                 3 Regarding this incident see Leicester Correspondence (Camden Society XXVILpp-39°-395, 

                     403-4).