62 

BIBLE-1611. 
[Title as in the First Edition, ‘He’ Bible.] 

SEconp EpITION of the Royal Version (‘She’ Bible). Folio in sixes. Black Letter. 
Cottation: A-B4; C5; D4; A-C; [-]?; A-5C%; A-Aa®; 752 leaves. 
ConTEnTs: as in preceding number. 

[75 ] 

VOL.I

Red morocco, extra, with Curzon arms on sides. 1634 x 113{¢ inches. The Curzon-Zouche (1920, 
‘opy: 
on ne false one made from a genuine but later state of the compartment but with the 
letterpress in pen-facsimile. There is inserted an extra title to the Genealogies which does Hoe 
appear to be listed by Fry. It has the Royal Arms (Steele No.17) and at bottom Cum Priui- 
legio.’ The Genealogies is Fry No.7. The Map is Fry No.14 with No.21 reverse. Sig [A4] of the 
preliminaries belongs with the 1613 title and is inserted from a smaller copy. Every other leaf 
of the preliminaries and text belongs to the genuine earliest edition of the ‘She’ version, i.e. the 
second edition of the Royal Version without the ‘reprints’, Smith’s ‘B’ text, with the exception 
of four sheets. It is doubtful if these sheets, 1i3-4, Kkk3-4, 411-6, 453-4, are not properly to be 
found in copies of the ‘B’ text. Certainly they occur there as frequently as not. Likewise sheet 
S1-6, and V3-4 of the New Testament are from the same setting in this copy as in the first edition 
of the ‘He’ Bible which is as should be in the ‘B’ text. With the exception of the title, this is a 
fine and very large copy. 

Tue present is the second edition of the ‘Royal’ Version, first edition of the so-called 
‘She’ series, sometimes called the ‘Great She Bible’. This is the issue without the 
‘reprint’ leaves. There are several unexplained features of this edition which will prob- 
ably always continue to puzzle bibliographers. In the first place, copies are usually 
found with a general-title dated 1613. Such copies have, as a rule, a number of sheets— 
usually about a third of the volume, the highest number recorded being about 128 
sheets—from a different and apparently later setting. Fry distinguished these variant 
sheets in his elaborate monograph but his classification is very arbitrary. W.E.Smith, 
on the other hand, basing his tests not only upon bibliographical minutiae which he 
observed in the variant settings themselves but also upon the conformity of some 
thirty copies, has establishedt a much more satisfactory standard. The original setting 
he designates the ‘B’ text, and the posterior setting, the ‘C’. As will be seen from the 
notes above, the present copy is almost entirely of the ‘B’ text, in fact except for the 
title and follower this is an unusually pure example. 
What accident led to the reprinting of so large a proportion of this edition or what 
circumstances caused so many copies of it to be withheld for three years can now only 
be conjectured. 
In this edition there is a remarkable error in Matthew XXVI_36, ‘Judas’ appearing 
for ‘Jesus’. Sometimes a correction slip is pasted over the mistake but in the present 
copy it is corrected in an early hand. Ruth III.15 has the reading ‘she’. 

{See The Library January, March, and April 1890 and amplification by A.W.Pollard in his Records (1911) 
65-73. 

S.T.C. 2217. Dartow anp Mouzs I No.246,