506 HOWARD, Henry Ear oF surrey (1517?-1547) and others. 
§ SONGES AND SONETTES | written by the right honorable Lorde | Henry 
Haward late Earle of Sur-| rey, and other. | Apud Richardum Tottell. | Cum 
priuilegio ad imprimendum | folum. 1557. | 

CoLoPHON: Bmprinted at London in fletettrete | within Temple barre, at the figne of the | band and 
ftarce, bp Richard Tote | till, the xxxi. vap of Fulp. | Anno. 1557. | Cum priuilegio ad impri- | 
mendum folum. | 

SECOND OR THIRD EDITION. Quarto. Black Letter. 
Cottation: A-Gg*; 120 leaves. 

Contents: title, recto fol.{1]; To the reader, — fol.[120]; verso blank. (Fol.23 is numbered 43, 
verso; text, recto fol.a-verso fol.117; The table, 79 is 76, 114 is 116, and 116 is 114). 
recto fol.{118]-verso fol.{119]; colophon, recto 

Blue straight-grain morocco, extra, by Bedford. 634 x 434 inches. In purple morocco box-case, by 
Stikeman. The Britwell (1919, Lot 56) copy. 
It is possible that this is the copy said to have belonged to Sir Watkins Williams Wynne. There 
are notes in an early, apparently sixteenth century hand, regarding the source of some of the 
pieces and also the names of the tunes to which they may be sung. Dr. Nott, in a footnote to his 
1815 edition of the Works of Surrey and Wyatt (p.cviii), remarked that ‘On the margins of an 
early copy of his Poems [i.e. the Songes and Sonettes| belonging to Sir W.W.Wynne are preserved 
in the characters of the times, several airs for the lute, to which Surrey's favorite little odes were 
sung. It seems highly probable that these airs were of Surrey’s composition. They are remarkable 
for expression, for artless sweetness and wild simplicity, and are all marked with a peculiar 
character of plaintive melody. They will be found printed from the original MS. in the late 
edition of Tottel’s Songes and Sonettes, 4t0. 1814 [the edition of which only fragments survive].’. 
Whether, when Nott wrote that passage he was acquainted with Wynne’s copy other than by 
report, or whether he referred in the latter part of his note to such of the airs which are noted in 
this copy by name and are elsewhere preserved must remain a matter for conjecture. Neverthe- 
less the fact that Wynne is said by Richard Heber to have had a copy of a 1557 edition and the 
present is the only copy known with annotations approaching Nott’s description, makes it seem 
that this is the otherwise lost and confusedly described Wynne copy. 
In any case, this copy came into the Britwell library after 1870, for it is not included in the 

VOL. [srr]

rivately printed catalogue of English poetry in that collection which was printed about that 
pn, Moreover, it was apparently bound before acquired because it does not bear the Miller 

monogram, etc. 

‘Tanne are two editions of this date, both exceedingly rare. Professor Rollins has 
demonstrated that, whatever their order may be, one must have been printed from 
the other and not both simultaneously from a common original. He has come to the 
conclusion, although the proof is not very convincing, that the edition of which this 
copy is an example is the latert. Both editions have the same collation but they may 
be distinguished by the presence or absence of the {| sign in the first line of the title, as 
well as by the numerous variant readings recorded by Rollins. 
There are thirty poems by Nicholas Grimald included in the first edition which 
were omitted in the second and subsequent editions; and thirty-nine other poems which 
are in the second and later editions but were not in the first. 
‘The present volume together with the copies of the three other editions in this library, 
see Plate No.XVI, form a series which in number can be paralleled or exceeded by those 
in the British Museum and Huntington, but which in condition can be equalled by 
none. 
Of the first edition (June 1557) one copy is known, the Tanner in the Bodleian. Of 
the other July 1557 edition there are only two copies, the Grenville (Heber IV, Lot 
2561), and the Huntington (Malone bequest to Bindley-Heber-Singer-Tite-Locker- 
White, an unhappy copy with several leaves inserted from another edition). Of the 
present only two other copies are known, the Capell (?Rawlinson) and the Bishop 
Thomas Percy-Lord Caledon copy now owned by the Rosenbach Company. This last 
may have a much more ancient and interesting pedigree. 

It was his copy of this book that Master Slender lamented he ‘had rather than forty 
shillings’. 

{Whatever the order of these editions may be, the repetition of the date in the colophon may have been due 
to carelessness (cf, Erasmus Praise of Folie 1549). It is also possible, however, that one of these July 
editions was pirated the absence of ornaments and initials make proof unlikely —and, if so, that pirated 

edition does not necessarily belong in strict chronological series for it may have been printed after one or 
both the 1559 editions or even later. 

Regarding the possibility that Grimald edited the July editions, see H.J.Byrom M.L.R. XXVII (1932) 125. 

S-T.C, 13862, Gnec Capell Cat., 67, SivKER T.C.C. Cat, No.222. Rouuis II, 11 (tp. facs.)