272 DEKKER, Tuo[mas]. 
THE | Double PP. | A Papift in Armes. Bearing | Ten feuerall Sheilds. | 
ENCOVNTRED | By the Proteftant. At | Ten feuerall Weapons. | A 
Iefuite | Marching before them. | Cominits & Eminis. | [printer’s device, 

McK.n.339] | At London Imprinted [by Thomas Creede for John Trundle 
and Eleazar Edgar]. | 1606. | 

  

FIRST EDITION; second issue. Quarto.

Couzation: [-]?(the first, blank and genuine); [-]!(watermark outer margin); A-E*; F?; 2 
leaves. (Sig A is a cancel). 3 3 FY; 25 

Contents: blank, first unsigned leaf; title, To all the Nobility, Clergy, & Gentry, recto A; 
Plate No.XI, recto second; verso blank; dedi- verso blank; text, recto A2-recto Fa; blank; 
catory sonnet to Sir Henry Cock, signed ‘Tho: verso F2. , ° 
Dekker.’t, recto third; verso blank; dedication 

Original vellum, extra, traces of ties. 734 x 5%4 inches. Signature on flyleaf ‘Eliza: Lucy:’ which a 
nineteenth century owner has described as belonging to one of the Lucys of Warwickshire, cf. 
Chapman Two wise men 1619. The Pigott (1847, Lot 100) — Britwell (1922, Lot 218) copy. 

THERE are two issues, one was intended for general circulation, while the other, e.g. 
the present, was apparently for private distribution by the author. The titles of the 
two issues, except for the imprints, are from the same setting. The imprint of the general 
issue reads: ‘LONDON, | Imprinted by T.C. and are to be fold by John | Hodgets, at 
his fhop in Paules Church- | yard, 1606. |’. The private issue has an extra leaf, inserted 
following the title, which contains Dekker’s dedicatory sonnet to Sir Henry Cock, see 
Plate No.XI. 
The priority of the general issue appears to be established as in it Sig A is integral 
and not a cancel. That leaf contains the dedicatory poem, ‘To all the Nobility, Clergy, 
and Gentry Of Great Brittaine, True Subiects to King James’, which was intended to 
be set-up in columnar form. As originally set the line-endings are quite ragged, the 
compositor not understanding his directions or misreading his copy. Consequently 
when the author had copies prepared for presentation this leaf was cancelled and a new 
setting, with the typographical structure corrected, was struck-off and inserted in its 
place. 
This book was entered to Trundle and Edgar, gth December 1605, and although 
neither name appears in the published work, it is probable that they were the actual 
proprietors, Hodgets merely acting as agent. In this regard it may be noted that Edgar 
later assigned a number of his copyrights, but not the present, to Hodgets, that Trundle 
entered for two other works by Dekker (The Dead Terme and Whore of Babylon) which 
when published did not bear his name, and that Hodgets’ name appears in the imprints 
of four of Dekker’s works (The Dead Terme {q.v.], Honest Whore (1st Part), Westward 
Hoe {q.v.], and the present) although he apparently made no entry for any of them. 
This singular work is a violent and somewhat fatuous attack upon papistry presum- 
ably brought forth by the discovery of the Guy Fawkes Plot since it was entered the 
month following although the book itself contains no direct reference to that incident 

except, perhaps, the verses on “The Moldwarp’, recto D2. 

is based upon the fact that a presentation copy in 
be traced and it is not unlikely that Collier’s auto- 
with the printed dedicatory sonnet 

+Collier states that the ascription of this tract to Dekker 
Dekker’s autograph is known. No such copy can now 
graph presentation copy is none other than a copy, such as the present, 

inserted (see Bridgewater Cat., P-97)+ 

VOL.I [ 265 ]

Of this issue, with the dedication to Sir Henry Cock, the present is the only copy 
which can be traced. The Bright-Bodleian copy has the present imprint, but lacks the 
dedication leaf. 
Of the first issue nine copies are traceable. Of these two are in the British Museum 
(George III; Corser); others are the Bodleian (Bliss), Dulwich, Huntington (Bridge- 
water), and Harvard Library (Locker); while the Bindley-Heber IV, Lot 1623-Britwell 
Clawson copy is now owned by the Rosenbach Company. There is an imperfect copy 
in the Folger Library as well as a copy, presumably of this issue, in the York Minster 
Library. 

S.T.C. 6498. ArBer III. 307. Huntincron C.L., 108. Coxirer Bibl. Acc. 1,242. Corser 
Collectanea II, 144. Hazuitt, 149. Locker Car. (1886) 28.