MS.1p 

           BROUNCKER,     W1..14M, 2nd Viscount (1620-1684) to [Dr. John Wallis']. 
           A.L.S. 
           4 SEPTEMBER  1655 

                Description:  Paper, one leaf, quarto. 
                PRovENANcE:  Sotheby’s  (10 December  1890, Lot 41)—Alfred Morrison (IV, 1919, Lot 2744). 

              Transcript:  S*  I finde my felfe much miftaken concerning my laft unto You; for I 
              did thinke I had (by that) beg’d of You the favour of putting what I had done already, 
              into fuch a dreffe as might beft become its attendance on yor incomparable peece?; by 
              reafon that my owne  occafions would not afforde me th’opportunity, nor indeed haue 
              Thad  the leafure, or did thinke of it fince; untill Satterday night laft, when I receiu’d 
              yours of the jot laft. What time I could obtaine for my Studies, haue been for the 
              moft part employ’d about  angular Sections upon the fame ground: whereof I do here- 
              with prefent You, what progreffe I haue already made therein; which, if you judge it 
              worthy, may  be alfo afiexed to this, or what other Tract of yo you like beft: for I 

             VOL.1II                          [ 1161  ]

acknowledge them originally yours; & that makes me the bolder in preffing this Trouble 
                            upon You. As foone as I had read & confidered yor excellent Tables of Figurate num- 
                            bers, & yo" difcourfe upon them, I endeavourd to fitt my Numbers for them; which 
                            I haue done in thefe following Tables, and thereby taken away (I thinke) all obfcurity 
                            from my  laft paper, & fupplied what might be therein wanting only yo" Character 
                            remembers  me, that I therein uf’d the fame in an other Some viz. for I?, or the fquare 
                            of what its afiexed unto. S‘ I beg againe You will take the trouble upon you of fitting 
                            for the preffe, what I haue done, as You Judge beft; for really I cafiot undertake it S' I 
                            defire likewife you will pardon the miftake, & efteeme me as I am St 
                                                            Yor very humble  fervant 
                                                              & affectionate Admirer 
                            [sign  of Mars] 4 Sept. 55.         Brouncker 

  

  

  

  

                               Notes:  1 From  the context this letter appears to be addressed to Dr. Wallis. It is similar in 
                                    tone and subject to the correspondence which Wallis published under the title ‘Commercium 
                                    Epistolicium’ 1658, in which collection the first letter is dated 5 March 1656-7. 
                                  2 Just what the ‘peece’ Brouncker sent may have been we have not succeeded in identifying. 
                                    The only part of the Operum Mathematicorum 1657 with which  Brouncker appears to have 
                                    been connected is the Adversus Mari Meibomii de proportionibus dialogius tractatus elencticus 
                                    which is dedicated to him.