ELIZABETH,  Queen or Encianp. 
                    L.S. 
                    21 MAY 1573 
                    GREENWICH 

             MS.15 

                                Description:   Foolscap  folio, 4 leaves, text (634 pp.) in Sir Thomas Smith’s hand, folded three 
                                times, slit for ribbon, traces of seal. 

                           Appress, p.8: To our trufty & welbeloued M* Doctor  Dale our Ambaffado   refident 
                           wt our good brother the french king. 

                           Transcript:  Elizabeth R [sign manual] By the Quene. 
                           Trufty and welbeloued we grete you well. Here was wt vs the xvijt® of this moneth de 
                           la motte fenelon! the frenche Ambaffado" who  propounding  vnto vs diverfe thinges 
                           was aunfwered  to eche parte moche after the teno" as followeth. 
                           ffirft where he was very erneft wt vs for a refolution in our mariage wt the duke of 
                           Alanfon, and brought  to vs IFes? from the Quene mother & the faid duke  by w*  it 
                           appered that the duke had erneftly required licence of his brother & mother to come 
                           over hither to follow his fute, wherunto they had accorded after that Rochell fhuld be 
                           won to the kinges obedience, fo as he was very erneft that we fhuld refolutely and fully 
                           aunfwer what  was our mynde  and intent therin. requiring alfo that his affurance for 
                           his cOming tarryeing or returning might be well confidered. We made  aunfwer  that 
                           we woold write our mynde  fully in our lfes to the faid Quene mother & the faid duke 
                           fo that they fhuld have no caufe to finde faulte w' vs in that behalf. The fome wherof 
                           was that we woolde  the Quene mother  fhuld call to remembrance hir former fpeches 
                           vfed, wh  was  that if he fhuld come and the mariage  not fuccede, ther woolde  of 
                           neceffitie great vnkindnes follow of it. And therfore confidering we could not give any 
                           affurance of mariage vntill we fhuld have feene him: we wiffhed that the faid Quene 

                                                       [ 1188 ]

woold  therof confider better, for that we woold  not have any  caufe of vnkindnes 
             imputed  to vs, if god fhuld difpofe our mynde after his comyng vpon fome caufes to 
             ys not now  knowen,  or for the difference of relligion not to affent to mariage. To wh 
             being aunfwered  by the Quene mother, than we fhuld fpedely aunfwer to the matter of 
             thaffurance for his comyng. 
             Touching  our ayding  of the king of Scottes and the ftaying of de virac here*, and that 
             he did fay that by  of laft treatie we fhuld joyne in all thinges w°h wer to be don for 
             the pacifieing of that countrey. and neither of vs do anything feverally: we aunfwered 
             that on our parte ther was  lefte nothing vndon that we could do for the pacifieing of 
              the troubles there. And as the king had before tymes had virac there and afterwards 
              fent la Crocq$ thither: So had we alfo fent the marfhall of Barwick® & after Henry 
              Killigrew’. But whan  they  bothe wer gon, du  Crocq  & virac and Henry Killigrew 
              remayning  ftill there at the requeft of the Regent* & the nobilitie in Scotland in the 
              kinges name, in hope of a full peace & accord to be fhortely concluded amonges them, 
              they did emongeft  themfelfes appoint Coihiffion's who at fst John{townes? did con- 
              clude and accord all controverfies betwixt the Regent and the lordes who then profeffed 
              their obedience to the king on the one parte, and therle of Huntley!® & the Hamiltons 
              & all other wh  wer on the cdtrary part. So that by that accord all the noble men & 
              other {tates of Scotland came to draw nye one lyne and grow  to gither in one entier 
              body  & parfit amitie amongeft themfelfes and in obedience to the king, and the fame 
              alfo eftabliffhed and enacted in their full parlament wherof you may fay that we could 
              not but be glad ffor it was that w'h bothe we did alwayes defire and as we take it the 
              french king alfo and w°h was pretended {pially in our laft treatie w‘ the faid king. That 
              to that ende we  fhuld bothe ioinctely travell by of meffengers and ambaffadours to 
              bring to paffe and otherwife ther is no claufe in the treatie to forbid either of vs a part 
              to furder vnitie & comon peace in Scotland fo as the fending of Killigrew thither alone 
              at the defire of the {tates of the realme is nothing againft the treatie. And now in this 
              meane  while  came  firft out of ffraunce one James Kircauldy"! the lord of Granges 
              brother as appereth by his own céfeffion & les of his own writing wt money & inftruc- 
              tions directly to hinder & let that cémon accord fo moche as might be and to encorage 
              thofe fewe of the caftell notw'ftanding the whole nobilitie of the realme wer otherwife 
              accorded, to contynew  in their obftinacie and rebellion againft their king & the reft of 
              the {tate and fo to contynew  ftill a civill warre affirming that ther was an other of 
              more  credit that fhuld come  fhortly after from the king w* more ample inftructions 
              and  ayde for the fame purpofe. And fo fhortly after as Kircauldy had faid before that 
              one fhuld come, de virac by tempeft was driven vpon the engliffhe fhore at Scarborough 
               in the north partes of England  of whofe comyng  neither by the french ambaffado" 
               monfet de la motte  nor by of ambaffadot  being in ffraunce, nor by any lfes or any 
               other wayes had we any woord  before of his comyng nor for what entent he fhuld come. 
               Wherupon   our Prefident!? in the north caufed him to be ftayed as reafon was vntill at 
               length that it was thought mete vpon knowlege  had out of Scotland of the vehement 
               fufpicion of his going thither to trouble that eftate, that he fhuld firft come hither to 

             VOL.III                          [ 1189  ]

vs to London  fithe wh tyme  we have hard  from Scotland many  céfirmations of the 
                          fufpicion conceived of his voiage and yet vpon importunitie of the french ambaffadot, 
                          we  wer content that he fhuld fende in to Scotland to fee whither the Regent & the 
                          lordes of Scotland wold be content that he fhuld come thither whom  we  did vnder- 
                          ftand to be  moche  offended wt thofe les &  doinges of James  Kircauldy, and  did 
                          fufpect that the faid de virac was fent rather to hinder their good agrement than to 
                          furder it or for fome other worfe practifes, as to convey the yong king out of the realme 
                          as it was put in their heddes to fufpect.. And though we can not as yet here that they 
                          in Scotland do affent to his comyng: yet vpon continewance of thambaffadors requeft 
                          and  feing the faid de virac is fo defirous to go thither w* affirmation that he will not 
                          hinder the cSmon  peace there wer we content to let him have a paffeport to paffe to 
                           Barwik and fo farre as we have any jurifdicion. So that in all this we made playne & 
                          evident to the faid ambaffadot that we have don but only that w°h was moft {pecially 
                          concluded in of laft agrement or treatie that is, recciled the fcottiffhe noble men being 
                          at variance wtin themfelfes that a firme & generall peace might be reftored to the hole 
                          nation the wh  wt the good inclination of the nobilitie of Scotland therto and partly 
                           by of minifters good mediation as they write thankes be to god  is now concluded 
                          emongeft  them. 
                           Ther only refted one or two peticompagnions in the caftell who refufing all honeft 
                          condicons & offers and fuche as the faid Erle of Huntley and the Hamiltons and all the 
                          reft depending vpon  them hath accepted, remayneth  obftinate and neither will con- 
                          curre and agree wt the generall peace & accorde of all the realme, but will kepe pler]- 
                           force the kinges principal caftell where his ordinance & munition dothe lye and w° 
                          caftell being in fuche obftinate pler]fons handes dothe endaunger the town of Edin- 
                           borough where law and  juftice is chiefly miniftered and where the p[ar]liament and 
                           convencions of the ftate of Scotland is comonly want to be kept as it hath don alredy 
                           to their greate infamy. And where as for the defire w°" we have that all thinges might 
                           be compounded  there wt quietnes and mutuall accorde & not by force after that the 
                           motions and p[er}fuations of the lordes of Scotland could take no place wt them in the 
                           caftell: we have fent our meffangers to them to admoniffhe and require them to take 
                           fome good order & compofition w' the king & Regent as the reft of the lordes have don 
                           and have offred by o minifters that no reafonable condicon fhuld be denyed them yet 
                           they never woold give eare but as it may appere dayly waxed more obftinate & endur- 
                          ate. Wherupon  the Regent &  the nobilitie feing their infolencies and the dayly hurtes 
                          wch  they did to the town of Edenborough and thinhabitantes there ftreght after that 
                          the abftinence was broken  vp they wer compelled  to entrenche the Caftell in & to 
                          kepe them  fhorter and folicitated [sic] vs continually w' lfes & meffengers to ayde the 
                          king our good brother to reduce thofe fewe his rebelles to fome good order & reafon 
                          and  to ayde ther king therto wt fome of our forces the w‘h as we have diverfe tymes 
                          tolde vnto monf*  de la motte for we  made  him alwayes  privie of our defeignes & 
                          doinges, we wer very lothe to do bycaufe we defired that firft all other good meanes 
                          that could be found  might be affayed nor woold  fende no force in vntill the three 

                                     [ 1190 ]

eftates of that realme in parlament had allowed and required that fo we fhuld do for 
            the ayde and  honour of that king our fo nere kinfman and that that realme might ones 
             be in a full & pler]fect quiet accord & peace w'in itfelf the w«h thofe onely fewe fmall 
             compagnons   woold take  vpon  them to interupt &  kepe a funder by  their infolent 
            ob{tinacy And  this we did (as we may lawfully do by our treatie) to conferve the realme 
             in the prefent eftate of quietnes not to alter it in any point, to ftrength & honot that 
             king, not to difturbe nor to.difhonor him, and at his requeft & the hole three eftates 
             defires & peticions, not againft their willes, and to cdtinew the amitie & treaties of the 
             three realmes, not to breake or interrupt any of them. And in this our doing we fee 
             not why our  good brother fhuld conceive any mifliking: for we have not entred in to 
             any league  wt them  neither have defired to enter in to any league that might be 
             preiudiciall to our good brother the french king or to the leagues & treaties made 
             betwixt the realmes of ffrance & Scotland heretofore, nor go about any fuche mater, 
             but gladly woold that that realme our next neighbour fhuld be in an vniverfall peace 
             &  amitie wtin itfelf, and that the king our next kinfman fhuld ones be in plerlfect 
             quietnes and vniverfally obeyed through out all his realme. 
             Touching  Conte  Mongomery’®   (for that was another point wherof he cdmoned  [sic] 
             wt vs) we have oftentimes told him whan thambaffadour woold come to vs wt fufpicions 
             that we woold  ayde him, that we never minded to ayde him either wt men, money, or 
             municon  although  we pitied his cafe. but we woold not for all that breake the amitie 
             wt our good brother and we  thinke thambaffadour to be fatiffied therin Thevent hath 
             {hewed  it felf what helpe he had of vs. That ther went fome fhips of our fubiectes and 
             fome  of our fubiectes wt him to Rochell ward: it is not vnlikly for we can not caufe to 
             be covered  the great affection that the more parte of our fubiectes do beare to that 
             comon  caufe of religion. And how moche thofe terrible maffacres & murders don in fo 
             many  places [‘in fraunce’, superior, in another hand, query Elizabeth’s] vpon them who 
              be of the fame religion wb they profeffe, doth greve them nor how greatly they do 
             pitie the miferies of the Rochellois & other who in ffraunce be in fo grete daungers & 
             diftres at this tyme for the profeffion of their religion, fo that if we did not hold the 
              bridell fo moche as we can do and is almoft incredible. It wer hard to kepe their handes 
              & bodies from doing that wh  their hart dothe defire, to ayde their miferable brethern 
              as they accompt them,  and to avenge thofe cruelties. But hitherto we have had fuche 
              refpect to the amitie betwixt our good brother & vs and  td the late fworne treatie 
              betwixt vs that altho wt fomewhat a do we  have kept them fo in order that no great 
              force could efcape thither to the difturbance of our good brother. yf fome w‘out our 
              will or knowlege did accompany  him thither: it can not be marvelled, having fo many 
              havens open, fo moche yougth  difpofed altho never fo rafhly to put it felf forward and 
              to feeke adventures. It is not vnknowen to the king what a nomber  of pirates & fea 
              rovers hath byn of long tyme vpon our feas here nere by reafon of the diffentions in the 
              low countries & in the realme of ffrance, from the w° they that can flye whan they be 
              fufpect ar many  tymes compelled  of force to be pirates. The wih pirates although we 
              have in part repreffed taken & puniffhed: yet we could not take them all. And of that 

             VOL.III                           [ 1191  ]

fort of men w°h fo do wander on the feas mengled of all nations, we fuppofe the moft 
                           plar]te of thofe fhips were that went wt the Conte. And for that wt w*h thambaffadot 
                           found moft  faulte, that cOming nere to Rochell, they put vp engliffhe flagges & the 
                           red croffe: It is not vnknowen that thofe kinde of people vfe alwayes to carry all maner 
                           of flagges fuche to put vp as for the tyme may beft ferve their turn. And it might be 
                           the Conties devife to make a fhewe as though they had byn all Engliffhe or the more 
                           parte of them. But none of them had either comaundement  or licence from vs. Never- 
                           theleffe we do wiffhe that the king our good brother could compound thofe controver- 
                           fies wt his fubiectes by fome quiet & godly way, and not to kepe them ftill in defpera- 
                           tion to the great difquietting of himfelf & thempoveriffhing of his realme. for every 
                           victory gotten vpon his fubiectes by bloude is his double loffe. bycaufe blud is fhed 
                           and his own  fubiectes be flayn on bothe the fides, fo that whither he be victor or 
                           vanquiffhed the loffe is alwais his, you may therfore fay that for the love w‘h we do 
                           beare vnto him, we defire moft erneftly that fome fuche order might be  taken that 
                           all his fubiectes of whither [sic] religion they were living honeftly, might live alfo quietly 
                          and  in fecuritie vnder him & his protection. And that if ther wer any meane wherin we 
                          might  aide him therin and to fo good an intent: we woold not faile but to employ for 
                          his fake therin any travell that he woold require vs to do: Given vnder our Signet at 
                          our  Manour  of Grenew‘h the xxjth of May the fifteneth yere of our regn 157314. 

                          SicNeD: T: Smith!®, 

                              Nores:  1 Bertrand de Salignas, Marquis de la Mothe Fenelon, sent ambassador  to England  in 
                                  1572. 
                                2 These letters are calendared in the State Papers, Foreign Series 1572-4, Nos.907, 919. 
                                3 Copies of these letters are calendared op. cit. Nos.974-5. 
                                4 Regarding  this incident see op. cit. Nos.869, 896, 900, 905 and 912. 
                                § De Verac and  Du Croc were sent by Charles 1X to Scotland, both together and separately, 
                                  to further with money and advice the cause of Queen  Mary. 
                                6 Sir William Drury, see D.N.B. 
                                7 Sir Henry Killigrew, see D.N.B. 
                                8 James  Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton. 
                                9 The ‘Abstinence’ was concluded jo July 1572. 
                               10 George, sth Earl of Huntley. 
                               11 Sir James Kirkcaldy, younger  brother of Sir William Kirkcaldy  of the Grange,  was  the 
                                  quixotic champion of Queen Mary. Regarding  his capture see State Papers, Scotland 1 (1509- 
                                  1603) 366 ff., and Foreign Series (1572-4) No.878, etc, 
                               12 Henry, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon. 
                               13 Gabriel, Comte de Montgomery,   who in this year collected a fleet in England for the relief 
                                  of Rochelle. 
                               14 For replies to this letter see State Papers, Foreign Series (1572-4) Nos.997-1000. 
                               15 Sir Thomas  Smith was appointed, for the second time, Secretary of State in 1572.