32 

BACON, Sir FRANCIS, VISCOUNT ST. ALBANS. 
THE | HISTORIE | OF THE RAIGNE | OF KING | HENRY | The 
Seuenth. | Written | By the Right Honourable, | FRANCIS, | Lord Verulam, 
Vifcount | St. Alan. | [rule] | LONDON, | Printed by William]. Stanshy 
for Matthew | Lownes, and William | Barret. | 1622. [in panel] | [in com- 
partment, McK. and F.n.224] 

Engraved frontispiece portrait of Henry VII by John Payne, half-length, with orb and sceptre, 
inscribed in panel below ‘Cor Regis infcrutabile.” 

First EpDITION. Folio in fours. 
Cottation: [-}4 (the first, a blank, lacking); B-Ii*; 127 leaves present. 

Contents: frontispiece, verso second unsigned 4/ban. |’, fourth leaf; text, pp.1-232; a char- 
leaf; title, recto third; verso blank; dedication acter of Henry VII, in italic, pp.233-248; 

to Prince Charles, signed ‘Your Highneffe moft Faults escaped, p.248. (Pages box-ruled). 
humble and | deuoted Seruant, | Francis St‘. 

Blue morocco, extra, by David. 1054 x 734 inches. A very fine clean copy. The Hoe (III, 1912, 
Lot 112)—Huntington— English Literature from London (1919, Lot 59a) copy with bookplate. 

[ 38 J

TueERrE are at least two editions of this date. The present may be easily distinguished 
by the fact that in it none of the errors listed on p.248 are corrected, whereas in another 
editionf three of the seven (viz. the first, fifth and last) are corrected. The editions are 
linear duplicates and their differences, though obvious upon juxtaposition, consist 
mainly of typographical variations. We have seen only these two editions but in a 
Leighton Catalogue (N. S. No. X, Lots 94-7) a third is mentioned. It is possible that 
that variant is either a made-up copy or even one of Dr. Greg’s ‘printer’s copies’. The 
fact that the copies we have examined do not appear to be ‘mixed’ seems to indicate 
that the printing of the various editions was not simultaneous. 
There has been some recent discussion regarding Bacon’s object in writing this work 
but no one seems to have recalled the letter{ on the subject which he wrote to Egerton 
some years before. In it he proposed, as a memorial to Elizabeth more fitting and 
permanent than the statue which James was then contemplating, to write a history of 
England. Apparently he was not encouraged as he thought he should or his other 
affairs intervened for this is the only part that was ever completed and, except for the 
fragments posthumously published, apparently all that he ever wrote. Nevertheless, 
fragmentary as this work is, and with all its faults, it has entitled Bacon to be ranked 
with those other English statesmen-historians, More and Clarendon. 
Bacon tells, pp.187-9, of the voyages of ‘Sebastian Gabato, a Venetian, dwelling in 
Bristow’ and of the circumstances that prevented Henry VII from employing Columbus 
in his service. 
Portions of this history have been republished in blank verse by the Shakespeare- 
Bacon theorists as the Tragedy of Henry the Seventh. 

+Several large and thick-paper copies of that corrected edition are known. They measure some three inches 
more in height than the small-paper copies, although the formes were not re-imposed. 
tT he original is preserved in the Huntington Library (Ellesmere MS. 128), It was printed in Bacon’s Letters 
1702, No. XVIII, 22-6, in both editions of the Cadala, in Collier’s Bridgewater Cat. and in his Bibl. Account. 

S.T.C. 1160. ARBERIV.64. Huntineton C.L.,17. Hoe Car. I (1903) 36.