CUDWORTH,     Ratpu (1617-1688) to John Selden. 
           A.L.S. 
           4 AUGUST 1645 
           [caMBRIDGE] 

    MS.126 

                 Description:   Paper, two  leaves, folio, pp.2-3 blank, with seal. 
                 Provenance:    Alfred Morrison  (IV, 1919, Lot 2814). 

              Appress,  p.4: To my  ever honoured  ffreind John Selden Esquire in White ffrieres 
              Thefe prefent [in another hand] by Ed: Ashpole Camb Car att y* 4 Swanes in bishop 
              gate he Returneth thurfdaye 

               Transcript:  Honoured   fir          I am not able fufficiently to exprefse how great 
               a Happines  I counted myfelfe owner  of, in that pofsibility, and hopefull probability, 
               wch we had of enioying you in a neerer relation to this Vniverfity!. And I should haue 
               made  bold to prefent this with my Humble   Service to you the last Weeke, but that 
               common   rumours  made  vs beleeve you would be here ere this. But fince I am more 
               staggerd in my  hope and ffaith of your vouchfafing to honour us in the acceptance 
               of a Place fo farre below yourfelfe whatfoeuer the obstacle may bee: Later informations 
               reprefenting at least your demurres and delay in it. Amongst fo many which honour 
               you Every  where, [‘an’ deleted] none could haue been more fenfible and proud of fuch 
               a happines then myfelfe. Though  the Place be not able to adde any thing to yourfelfe, 
               yet if you should pleafe to give lustre to that, and this Vniverfity, by condefcending 
               to accept of it I hope it could not but be Honourable to you. I am most of all vnwilling 
               to disturb or interrupt your more ferious emploiments, but that fo great an occafion 
               as this is could not but extort this from [‘you’ deleted] me, and I prefume you will 
               pardon  it. And I befeech you, Sir, let your Goodnes continue that ffavour to me, wh, 
               I cannot merit, to enioy a Place in your affections, and I shall ever remaine 
                                                 Y™ most Devoted  fervant 
                                                   Ralphe Cudworth 

             Aug. 4. 1645 
            VOL.HI                          [ 1253 ]

Nore: 1 Selden, at this time, was offered the mastership of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, by the 
                                       direction of the House of Commons.  He declined it. Cudworth,  on  the other hand, had 
                                       just been appointed master of Clare Hall by parliamentary authority. Transcribed, with 
                                       facsimile of signature in Morrison Catalogue 1, p.263.