73 BOCCACCIO, Giovannl. 
2 The trage- [in Fraktur] | dies, gathered bp Thon | Bochas, of all tuch 
Princes as | fell from thepe eftates throughe | the mutability of Fortune fince | 
the creacion of Adam, ontil his | time: wherein map be feen that | bices bring 
menne to deftrucei- | on, wpth notable twwarninges | hotwe the like map be auopded. 
Trantlated into Englpth by | John Lidgate, Monke | of Burpe. | €C Imprinted 
at London, by John Wayland, at the tigne | of the Sunme ouer againtt the 
Conduite in Flete- | {trete. | Cum priuilegio per Sep= | tennium. | [in com- 
partment, McK. & F.n.76q] 

  

  

  

Woodcut, the creation of Eve, the temptation, and the expulsion from the garden, an old cut not 
damaged (recto [Aq], fol.1)f. It is flanked by terminal side-pieces which formerly belonged to 
Berthelet and passed from him to Powell who used them in 1556 on the title of Heywood’s Spider 
and Flie [q.v.]. 

Trp OR FOURTH EDITION. Translated by John Lydgate. Folio in sixes. Black Letter. 

Cottation: +6; A-Y®; Z4; &6; WS; 6; +6; |; Aa-Ff®; Gg* (the last, see below, lacking); 
213 leaves present. (Sig &2 is signed &3, Bb2 is B2, and Ffs is Ff3). 

Contents: title, recto [++]; verso blank; Table, recto fol.37; blank, verso fol.37. (Fol.13 is num- 
recto +2—recto [+6]; blank, verso [+6]; The bered 12, 14 is 13, 60 is 54, 67 is 66, 69 is 61, 
Prologue, recto A—recto A3; blank, verso A3; and 149 is 141; in repeated series, 13-18 are 
text, recto fol.1 —verso fol.163, recto 1-36,35— 12-17, and 22 is 28). 

Red morocco, by Riviere for Hagen, 1905. 1254 x 834 inches. The Hagen (1918, Lot 741)— 
Clawson (I, 1926, Lot 54) copy with bookplates and notes. 

Tuts edition is entirely independent of that published by Tottel the roth September 
1554 [q.v.]. It is a reprint of Pynson’s second edition, 1527, and although bibliographers 
unanimously place it later than the Tottel edition there is some reason to believe that 
it precedes itt. The fact that Wayland’s patent included the sole right to the printing 
for seven years of such books as he should first print probably would have no force as 

{See Hodnet No.2049. This block was used by Verard in his Grandes Heures 1489. 
{The date of publication of this edition can be determined roughly within a period of some eighteen or 
twenty months as follows. On the verso of the separate title, Sig [Gga], found in several copies, see note 
below, Wayland printed the patent which he received from Mary, 24th October 1553, which provides a 
terminus, while Hazlitt records a copy bearing in an early hand a note stating that it was purchased in 
1555, which may provide a date ante quam. This is corroborated by Baldwin’s reference to the suppression 
of Wayland’s edition of the Mirror for Magistrates in his address in the 1559 edition of that work as having 
occurred ‘iii yeares agoe’. But since it is impossible to tell whether Baldwin was accurate or whether he 
was writing some time before the 1559 edition was printed or even in what part of the year that edition 
was produced, the question of the priority of these two editions cannot be settled by this evidence. It may 
be observed, however, that the dated product of Wayland’s press in 1554 is very meager as compared with 
that of 1555 and that, other things being equal, it is more likely that during the lean period when Wayland 

was awaiting the copy for the Primer of 1555, he produced this volume. For another view, see Prof.L.B. 
Campbell Huntington Bulletin No.6. 

[ 86 ]

regards this book for neither Tottel nor Wayland was the first printer of ittf. However, 
it is difficult to believe that Wayland would publish a reprint of Pynson’s corrupt text 
to compete with Tottel’s corrected and much superior one and therefore, particularly 
as nowhere in his garrulous notes does he mention Tottel’s edition, it would seem 
likely that this by Wayland was at least in the press before Tottel’s edition was 
published. 
Wayland was not content with reprinting Pynson’s text of the Lydgate translation 
but conceived, according to the story William Baldwin relates§, the idea of supple- 
menting that work with a series of ‘tragedies’ of English men and women which after- 
wards formed the nucleus of the Mirror for Magistrates. He not only conceived the idea 
but apparently actually carried it out for the copy of the present work in the Dyce 
collection has a general-title which refers specifically to that continuationta. Moreover, 
several copies{a of this book have printed on recto [Ggq] a separate title which reads 
‘fin same compartment as general-title] @ memorial [in Fraktur] | of tuche Princes, as 
{ince | the tyme of King Richard | the feconde, haue been | wnfortunate in the | Realme of | Eng- 
lanv. | (2) | LONDINI | In edibus Johannis Waylandi. | cum priuilegio per Sep | 
tennium. |’. And, finally, in the British Museum are preserved two duplicate leaves, 
containing part of the legend of Owen Glendower with headline reading ‘A briefe 
memorial of Unfortunate Englysh princes.’tta which obviously belong to this edition 
of Wayland’s. 
Whether Wayland actually completed the publication of this edition or whether he 
was forced by the authorities to desist before it was entirely set-up can only be finally 
determined by the discovery of a complete copy$«. The separate title for the later 
portion is usually described as a ‘trial-title’ but, obviously, if that was its nature it 
would not have been printed as an integral part of sheet G1-4. Also, the fact that Way- 
land mentioned this continuation in the (Dyce copy) general-title, which, presumably, 
was not set-up until the rest of the book was completed, inclines one to believe that the 
prohibition came after the book was ready for publication{é. 

tt’The same is true of the editions of Hawes’ Pastime of Pleasure which were issued by Wayland in 1554, and 
by Tottel in 1555. 
§See A Briefe Memorial (recto A-A2) Mirror, for Magistrates 1559. 
jaSee reproduction and notes in Trans. XIII (1932) 154-7+ 
taOne is in the British Museum (Grenville), another is in the Morgan, a third is in the Folger Library, and 
we have seen four others listed in catalogues. 
ttaHaslewood estimated that if Wayland included all of the text which was later printed in Marshe’s edition 
of the Mirror for Magistrates 1559 (q.v.l, in the format of these leaves his edition would have filled only 
twenty-five or thirty leaves. 
§aThe reason for the suppression of this edition has been pointed out by W.C.Trent and elaborated by 
Miss Feasey (Trans. III (1923) 177)+ . 
}oThis would account for the fact that in no copy which we have traced, and this book is not uncommon, is 
a genuine blank [Gg4] preserved. However, it should be noted that Baldwin in the dedication of the 1559 
edition says that the Mirror for Magistrates ‘was begun and parte of it printed’ by Wayland which appar- 
easonable doubt as to whether Baldwin there refers to the 

ently should settle the question were there not r f 
£ it which he later was able to see published. 

book as originally conceived or merely to that portion o 

VOL.I [ 87]

The cause of the extraordinary signature marks used in this edition can only be con- 
jectured. The most reasonable explanation, however, seems to be that Wayland divided 
the work between two compositors, one of whom was to do the first seven books, and 
the other, starting with the eighth book, was to complete the volume including the 
Mirror for Magistrates. The second compositor began his portion with Sig Aa, Fol. 1, 
so that the compositor of the first portion as he approached the end of his task, finding 
that he could not manage with a regular alphabet of twenty-three signatures and was 
prevented from doubling in the usual way, was compelled to employ symbols instead of 
letters. In corroboration of this explanation it may be observed that the leaf-numbers 
in the first portion are all prefixed ‘Leaf.’, while those in the later portion are ‘Fol.’. 
There would appear to be large-paper copies of this book for, while the present copy 
has ample margins, copies are known which are more than an inch taller, but in those 
which we have examined, though not among the largest known, the paper is the same 
as in the present. 
Copies of this book occasionally occur bound with Wayland’s edition of Bieston’s 
The bayte & snare of fortune, e.g. one of the Folger copies, Sotheby 18 July 1933, et al. 
Both issues of the Bieston are undated but it was presumably printed about the same 
time as the present and perhaps was intended, the subject being somewhat similar, 
to be issued in /iew of the suppressed Memorial.

S.T.C. 3178. Huntincton C.L., 266. Hoe Car. III (1903) 94. Hutu Cat. 1,176. GRoLier 
Crus L-W, 142. SinKER T.C.C. Cat. No.80. Ames (Edit. Herbert) I, 565. Ames (Edit. 
Dibdin) III, 530. Dyce Cat. I, 100.