436 

GREENE, Roserr. 
[Rule] | The Spanifh Mafquerado. | [rule] | VVherein vnder a | pleafant 
deuife, is difcouered | effectuallie, in certaine breefe fentences and | Mot- 
tos, the pride and infolencie of the | Spanifh eftate: with the difgrace | 
conceiued by their loffe, and | the difmaied confufior | of their tronbled 
[sic] | thoughtes. | Whereunto by the Author, for the better vnder- | ftand- 
ing of his deuice, is added a breefe gloffe. | By Robert Greene, in Artibus 
Magifter. | Twelue Articles of the {tate of Spaine. | The Cardinals follicite 
all. | The King grauntes all. | The Nobles confirme all. | The Pope determines 
all. | The Cleargie difpofeth all. | The Duke of Medina hopes for all. | Alonfo 
receiues all. | The Indians minifter all. | The Souldiours eat all. | The people 
paie all. | The Monkes and Friers confume all. | And the deuill at length wil 
cary away all. | § Printed at London by Roger Ward, for | Thomas Cadman,

1589. | 
SECOND EDITION. Quarto. Black Letter. 

Cottation: A-E*; 20 leaves. 

VOL.IL [ 427 ]

Contewrs: title, recto [A]; verso blank; dedi- Readers, signed ‘Robert Greene.’, recto A3s 
cation to Hugh Osleyt, in roman, signed ‘Rod. the list of characters, in roman, the mottos in 
ert Greene), recto A2; French Sonnet, in italic, italic, verso Ag-recto Aq; blank, verso Aq; text, 
“Thomas Lodge’, verso A2; To the Gentlemen recto B-recto E4; blank, verso E4. 

Olive morocco, extra, padded with blanks, by Charles Smith. 634 x 434 inches. The Utterson 
(1852, Lot goo) —Britwell (December 1919, Lot 39) copy with bookplate. 

AppareNTLY before the type was entirely distributed it was found that the demand for 
this book was greater than had been anticipated and another edition was immediately 
made ready. The outer forme of sheet A and, with slight changes presumably occasioned 
by unlocking, the inner forme of sheet E, are from the same setting in both editions. 
Evidently the first edition was already sold or, at any rate, gathered and folded, before 
the second edition was ready, for the copies which we have examined do not have 
mixed sheets as would otherwise be the case. The two editions are usually distinguished 
by the signature to the dedication which in the present is in italic and in the other is in 
roman. A comparison of the two reveals numerous typographical variations—ones 
which at first glance, however, appear to present conflicting evidence. In the present 
edition, though the characters as listed in the inner forme of sheet A are numbered, the 
sections devoted to them in the text are not with the exception of the last two in sheet 
E. In the other edition both the list of characters and the corresponding sections of the 
text are numbered, except for the twelfth section, verso E2 (outer forme). The fact that 
in the inner forme of sheet E, the only portion of the text from the same setting in both 
editions, the sections are numbered would seem to indicate that the edition with the 
sections numbered throughout was the earlier. Under this hypothesis it is difficult to 
explain why the twelfth section should be numbered in the present edition and not in 
the other but perhaps, as there are some errors corrected in the present setting of that 
outer forme, it was prompted by a manuscript correction in the copy of the first edition 
used by the compositor and forgotten when it was decided to omit the section numbers 
in resetting sheets B-D. 
In many ways, though not consciously for it precedes that genre by some twenty 
years, this pamphlet might be described as a character-book written in the manner of 
a book of emblems without the impresses. Twelve characters or types, €.g- Pope, King, 
Cleargy, form the ‘“Masquerado’. Each has its appropriate Latin motto followed by a 
‘glossa’ written in a fervently protestant vein which, nevertheless, displays to good 
advantage Greene’s nervous and powerful command of English prose. 
Of the present edition we have located five other copies, viz. the British Museum 
(Grenville; Old Royal), Huntington (Hoe), Morgan (Griswold), and the Harvard 
(White). But copies of unidentified editions are in the Dyce, Chatsworth, Ashley 
(Christ Church-Lyte-Huth), and the Wrenn Libraries. Of the first edition there are 

Flowndes (II, 996) states that this book is dedicated to Philip, Earl of Arundel, but we have failed to 
locate such a copy. 

{ 428 ]

copies in the British Museum (Wright-George III), Bodleian (Malone), Folger (Claw- 
son), Harvard (White), and the Chapin Libraries. 

S.T.C. 12310. ARBER II. 515. Huntincron C.L., 186. W.A.WHITE Car., 54. Corser 
Collectanea 1V, 63. Hoe Cat. H (1903) 284. ASHLEY Car. II, 162 (tp. facs.). Grouter CLuB