RALEIGH,  Sir Water to [Sir Joun Ginpert]. 
         ALS: 
         13 SEPTEMBER 1588 

   MS.107 

                Description:   Paper, folio, 1 leaf, p.2 blank. No seal not address, fair condition. Tytler Raleigh 
                I fol.231. Pomeroy  Gilbert No.5. 

             Transcript:  S‘, wth muche adoe wee haue gotten order for you to fell the wyne' and 
             fo to fatiffye yor felf yf this had not byn broughte to paffe you mighte p[er]happs have 
             looked for yo" monye a good while. Ther is allfo order fent you to fend vp xvj Buttes of 
             the wyne to be devided among  the Ll. and others of the confell, when yt comithe I 
             praye you take fuche a courfe that I maye haue a letter directed to me to have the 
             p'fenting of yt to my L Admirall for by that meanes I maye happ gett a butt for my 
             felf of the reft of the wynes appoynted to be fold I praye you take xx" Buttes in to 
             yor feller preyfed at as reafonable rate as you can And S* Richard Greynvill as he 
             goyth home  fhall com by you and paye ready monye for yt I muft allfo praye you to 
             fett afyde xxv toonnes of the Ieron hooped emptye cafke for me preyfed in fuche rea- 
             fonable fort as you maye for I fhall have great ufe of them and yf my Lo of Comber- 
             land or any other make meanes to have them you maye  anfwer that they are preyfed 

         VOL.                        [ 853 ]

and folde or that her Mati hathe gyven them to me but in any cafe lett them be kept 
                             for me. And fo wt my  mofte  hartie comendations to yo" fellf and my good Ladye I 
                             byd you ffarewell Courte the xiij of September 1588 
                                                         your most loving brother 
                                                            [Signed] W Ralegh 
                             [Postscript] I pray cified me to y Sister many times. 

                               Nore: ! Perhaps wine that had been taken as prize by Gilbert from the Spanish Armada.