MS.106 RALEIGH, Sir Watrer to Sir Humpurey GIBer. 
                 ALS. 

                       [16 MaRcH 1582'] 

                               Description:  Paper, folio, 1 leaf (a second leaf bearing address and endorsement was attached 
                               but is now lacking although an eighteenth century transcription has preserved  its content”). 
                               Damaged   by damp  and neglect. Tytler Raleigh I fol.116, Pomeroy Gilbert No.11. 

[ 852 ]



FE y Te 

           Hotocrapu  Letrer 0 
                             F Six WALTER RALEIGH To SiR HumpHREY GILBERT [Marcu 1582]. MS. 106

Transcripr,   see Plate No.XXXVIII:     Brother I haue  fent yow  a token from  her 
             Maiesty  an ancor guyded  by  a Lady as yow  fee, and farther her highness willed mee 
             to fend yow  worde that fhe wifhed as great good hap and fafty to your fhip as if her 
             fealf were ther in parfon defiring yow to haue care of your fealf as of that w°h fhe ten- 
             dereth and  therfore {for her face yow} muft provide for hit accordingly{;] farther fhe 
             cummandeth    that yow leue your picture* wth mee, for the reft I leue till owr meetinge 
             or to the report of this berer, who would needs be the mefsengre of this good newfe, 
             fo I commit yow  to the will and protection of god who fend vs fuch life or death as he 
             fhall pleas or hath apoyneted, —richmonde  this friday morninge 
                                              Your  trew brother 
                                          [Signed] W Rawley  [paraph] 

               Nores: ! This letter was printed by Cayley and Edwards from a transcript made by Dr. Thomas 
               Birch from this original when it was still in the possession of Pomeroy Gilbert (B.M.Add. MS. 
              4230  fol,85). The Friday before the 18th March 1582 would, according to our calculations, be 
              the 16th, not the 17th as given by Edwards. 
              2 The transcript reads: To my brother ft humfry Gilbert Knight refeived the 18th of Marche 1582. 
              3 Gilbert lost his life on this expedition. 
              4 This picture may be the one engraved for the Herwologia for it represents Gilbert without the 
              anchor  ornament whereas  the picture at Devonshire house has that ornament and consequently 
              is posthumous.